THE LITTLE EDEN


The mortar ended hostilities--temporarily, at least; but the cave
men loitered about the base of the cliff during the balance of the
afternoon, occasionally shouting taunts at the two above them.

These the girl answered, evidently in kind. Sometimes she would point
to Waldo and make ferocious signs, doubtless indicative of the horrible
slaughter which awaited them at his hands if they did not go away and
leave their betters alone. When the young man realized the significance
of her pantomime he felt his heart swell with an emotion which he
feared was pride in brutal, primitive, vulgar physical prowess.

As the long day wore on Waldo became both very hungry and very thirsty.
In the valley below he could see a tiny brooklet purling, clear and
beautiful, toward the south. The sight of it drove him nearly mad, as
did also that of the fruit which he glimpsed hanging ripe for eating at
the edge of the forest.

By means of signs he asked the girl if she, too, were hungry, for he
had come to a point now where he could look at her almost without
visible signs of mortification. She nodded her head and, pointing
toward the descending sun, made it plain to him that after dark they
would descend and eat.

The cave men had not left when darkness came, and it seemed to Waldo a
very foolhardy thing to venture down while they might be about; but the
girl made it so evident that she considered him an invincible warrior
that he was torn with the conflicting emotions of cowardice and an
unaccountable desire to appear well in her eyes, that he might by his
acts justify her belief in him.

It seemed very wonderful to Waldo that any one should look upon him
in the light of a tower of strength and a haven of refuge; he was not
quite certain in his own mind but that the reputation might lead him
into most uncomfortable and embarrassing situations. Incidentally, he
wondered if the girl was a good runner; he hoped so.

It must have been quite near midnight when his companion intimated that
the time had arrived when they should fare forth and dine. Waldo wanted
her to go first, but she shrank close to him, timidly, and held back.

There was nothing else for it, then, than to take the plunge, though
had the sun been shining it would have revealed a very pale and
wide-eyed champion, who slipped gingerly over the side of the ledge to
grope with his feet for a foothold beneath.

Half-way down the moon rose above the forest--a great, full, tropic
moon, that lighted the face of the cliff almost as brilliantly as might
the sun itself. It shone into the mouth of a cave upon the ledge that
Waldo had just reached in his descent, revealing to the horrified eyes
of the young man a great, hairy form stretched in slumber not a yard
from him.

As he looked, the wicked little eyes opened and looked straight into
his.

With difficulty Waldo suppressed a shriek of dismay as he turned to
plunge madly down the precipitous trail. The girl had not yet descended
from the ledge above.

She must have sensed what had happened, for as Waldo turned to fly she
gave a little cry of terror. At the same instant the cave man leaped to
his feet. But the girl's voice had touched something in the breast of
Waldo Emerson which generations of disuse had almost atrophied, and for
the first time in his life he did a brave and courageous thing.

He could easily have escaped the cave man and reached the
valley--alone; but at the first note of the young girl's cry he wheeled
and scrambled back to the ledge to face the burly, primitive man, who
could have crushed him with a single blow.

Waldo Emerson no longer trembled. His nerves and muscles were very
steady as he swung his cudgel in an arc that brought it crashing down
upon the upraised guarding arm of the cave man.

There was a snapping of bone beneath the blow, a scream of pain--the
man staggered back, the girl sprang to Waldo's side from the ledge
above, and hand in hand they turned and fled down the face of the cliff.

From a dozen cave-mouths above issued a score of cave men, but the
fleeing pair were half-way across the clearing before the slow-witted
brutes were fully aware of what had happened. By the time they had
taken up the pursuit Waldo and the girl had entered the forest.

For a few yards the latter led Waldo straight into the shadows of the
wood, then she turned abruptly toward the north, at right angles to the
course they had been pursuing.

She still clung to the young man's hand, nor did she slacken her speed
the least after they had entered the darkness beneath the trees. She
ran as surely and confidently through the impenetrable night of the
forest as though the way had been lighted by flaming arcs; but Waldo
was continually stumbling and falling.

The sound of pursuit presently became fainter; it was apparent that the
cave men had continued on straight into the wood; but the girl raced
on with the panting Waldo for what seemed to the winded young man an
eternity. Presently, however, they came to the banks of the little
stream that had been visible from the caves. Here the girl fell into
a walk, and a moment later dragged the Bostonian down a shelving bank
into water that came above his knees.

Up the bed of the stream she led him, sometimes floundering through
holes so deep that they were entirely submerged.

Waldo had never learned the vulgar art of swimming, so it was that he
would have drowned but for the strong, brown hand of his companion,
which dragged him, spluttering and coughing, through one awful hole
after another, until, half-strangled and entirely panic-stricken, she
hauled him safely upon a low, grassy bank at the foot of a rocky wall
which formed one side of a gorge, through which the river boiled.

It must not be assumed that when Waldo Emerson returned to face the
hairy brute who threatened to separate him from his new-found companion
that by a miracle he had been transformed from a hare into a lion--far
from it.

Now that he had a moment in which to lie quite still and speculate upon
the adventures of the past hour, the reaction came, and Waldo Emerson
thanked the kindly night that obscured from the eyes of the girl the
pitiable spectacle of his palsied limbs and trembling lip.

Once again he was in a blue funk, with shattered nerves that begged to
cry aloud in the extremity of their terror.

It was not warm in the damp cañon, through which the wind swept over
the cold water, so that to Waldo's mental anguish was added the
physical discomfort of cold and wet. He was indeed a miserable figure
as he lay huddled upon the sward, praying for the rising of the sun,
yet dreading the daylight that might reveal him to his enemies.

But at last dawn came, and after a fitful sleep Waldo awoke to find
himself in a snug and beautiful little paradise hemmed in by the high
cliffs that flanked the river, upon a sloping grassy shore that was all
but invisible except from a short stretch of cliff-top upon the farther
side of the stream.

A few feet from him lay the girl.

She was still asleep. Her head was pillowed upon one firm, brown arm.
Her soft black hair fell in disorder across one cheek and over the
other arm, to spread gracefully upon the green grass about her.

As Waldo looked he saw that she was very comely. Never before had he
seen a girl just like her. His young women friends had been rather prim
and plain, with long, white faces and thin lips that scarcely ever
dared to smile and scorned to unbend in plebeian laughter.

This girl's lips seemed to have been made for laughing--and for
something else, though at the time it is only fair to Waldo to say that
he did not realize the full possibilities that they presented.

As his eyes wandered along the lines of her young body his Puritanical
training brought a hot flush of embarrassment to his face, and he
deliberately turned his back upon her.

It was indeed awful to Waldo Emerson to contemplate, to say the least,
the unconventional position into which fate had forced him. The longer
he pondered it the redder he became. It was frightful--what would his
mother say when she heard of it?

What would this girl's mother say? But, more to the point,
and--horrible thought--what would her father or her brothers do to
Waldo if they found them thus together--and she with only a scanty
garment of skin about her waist--a garment which reached scarcely below
her knees at any point, and at others terminated far above?

Waldo was chagrined. He could not understand what the girl could be
thinking of, for in other respects she seemed quite nice, and he was
sure that the great eyes of her reflected only goodness and innocence.

While he sat thus, thinking, the girl awoke and with a merry laugh
addressed him.

"Good morning," said Waldo quite severely.

He wished that he could speak her language, so that he could convey to
her a suggestion of the disapprobation which he felt for her attire.

He was on the point of attempting it by signs, when she rose, lithe
and graceful as a tigress, and walked to the river's brim. With a deft
movement of her fingers she loosed the thong that held her single
garment, and as it fell to the ground Waldo, with a horrified gasp,
turned upon his face, burying his tightly closed eyes in his hands.

Then the girl dived into the cool waters for her matutinal bath.

She called to him several times to join her, but Waldo could not look
at the spectacle presented; his soul was scandalized.

It was some time after she emerged from the river before he dared risk
a hesitating glance. With a sigh of relief he saw that she had donned
her single garment, and thereafter he could look at her unashamed when
she was thus clothed. He felt that by comparison it constituted a most
modest gown.

Together they strolled along the river's edge, gathering such fruits
and roots as the girl knew to be edible. Waldo Emerson gathered those
she indicated--with all his learning he found it necessary to depend
upon the untutored mind of this little primitive maiden for guidance.

Then she taught him how to catch fish with a bent twig and a
lightninglike movement of her brown hands--or, rather, tried to teach
him, for he was far too slow and awkward to succeed.

Afterward they sat upon the soft grass beneath the shade of a wild
fig-tree to eat the fish she had caught. Waldo wondered how in the
world the girl could make fire without matches, for he was quite sure
that she had none; and even should she be able to make fire it would be
quite useless, since she had neither cooking utensils nor stove.

He was not left long in wonderment.

She arranged the fish in a little pile between them, and with a sweet
smile motioned to the man to partake; then she selected one for
herself, and while Waldo Emerson looked on in horror, sunk her firm,
white teeth into the raw fish.

Waldo turned away in sickening disgust

The girl seemed surprised and worried that he did not eat. Time and
again she tried to coax him by signs to join her; but he could not even
look at her. He had tried, after the first wave of revolt had subsided,
but when he discovered that she ate the entire fish, without bothering
to clean it or remove the scales, he became too ill to think of food.

Several times during the following week they ventured from their
hiding-place, and at these times it was evident from the girl's
actions that she was endeavoring to elude their enemies and reach a
place of safety other than that in which they were concealed. But at
each venture her quick ears or sensitive nostrils warned her of the
proximity of danger, so that they had been compelled to hurry back into
their little Eden.

During this period she taught Waldo many words of her native tongue, so
that by means of signs to bridge the gaps between, they were able to
communicate with a fair degree of satisfaction. Waldo's mastery of the
language was rapid.

On the tenth day the girl was able to make him understand that she
wished to escape with him to her own people; that these men among whom
he had found her were enemies of her tribe, and that she had been
hiding from them when Waldo stumbled upon her cave.

"I fled," she said. "My mother was killed. My father took another mate,
always cruel to me. But when I had wandered into the land of these
enemies I was afraid, and would have returned to my father's cave. But
I had gone too far.

"I would have to run very fast to escape them. Once I ran down a narrow
path to the ocean. It was dark.

"As I wandered through the woods I came suddenly out upon a beach, and
there I saw a strange figure on the sand. It was you. I wanted to learn
what manner of man you were. But I was very much afraid, so that I
dared only watch you from a distance.

"Five times I came down to look at you. You never saw me until the last
time, then you set out after me, roaring in a horrible voice.

"I was very much afraid, for I knew that you must be very brave to
live all alone by the edge of the forest without any shelter, or even
a stone to hurl at Nagoola, should he come out of the woods to devour
you."

Waldo Emerson shuddered.

"Who is Nagoola?" he asked.

"You do not know Nagoola!" the girl exclaimed in surprise.

"Not by that name," replied Waldo.

"He is as large," she began in description, "as two men, and black,
with glossy coat. He has two yellow eyes, which see as well by night as
by day. His great paws are armed with mighty claws. He----"

A rustling from the bushes which fringed the opposite cliff-top caused
her to turn, instantly alert.

"Ah," she whispered, "there is Nagoola now."

Waldo looked in the direction of her gaze.

It was well that the girl did not see his pallid face and popping
eyes as he looked into the evil mask of the great black panther that
crouched watching them from the river's further bank.

Into Waldo's breast came great panic. It was only because his
fear-prostrated muscles refused to respond to his will that he did not
scurry, screaming, from the sight of that ferocious countenance.

Then, through the fog of his cowardly terror, he heard again the girl's
sweet voice: "I knew that you must be very brave to live all alone by
the edge of that wicked forest."

For the first time in his life a wave of shame swept over Waldo Emerson.

The girl called in a taunting voice to the panther, and then turned,
smiling, toward Waldo.

"How brave I am now," she laughed. "I am no longer afraid of Nagoola.
You are with me."

"No," said Waldo Emerson, in a very weak voice, "you need not fear
while I am with you."

"Oh!" she cried. "Slay him. How proud I should be to return to my
people with one who vanquished Nagoola, and wore his hide about his
loins as proof of his prowess."

"Y-yes," acquiesced Waldo faintly.

"But," continued the girl, "you have slain many of Nagoola's brothers
and sisters. It is no longer sport to kill one of his kind."

"Yes--yes," cried Waldo. "Yes, that is it--panthers bore me now."

"Oh!" The girl clasped her hands in ecstasy. "How many have you slain?"

"Er--why, let me see," the young man blundered. "As a matter of fact, I
never kept any record of the panthers I killed."

Waldo was becoming frantic. He had never lied before in all his life.
He hated a lie and loathed a liar. He wondered why he had lied now.

Surely it were nothing to boast of to have butchered one of God's
creatures--and as for claiming to have killed so many that he could
not recall the number, it was little short of horrible. Yet he became
conscious of a poignant regret that he had not killed a thousand
panthers, and preserved all the pelts as evidence of his valor.

The panther still regarded them from the safety of the farther shore.
The girl drew quite close to Waldo in the instinctive plea for
protection that belongs to her sex. She laid a timid hand upon his
skinny arm and raised her great, trusting eyes to his face in reverent
adoration.

"How do you kill them?" she whispered. "Tell me."

Then it was that Waldo determined to make a clean breast of it, and
admit that he never before had seen a live panther. But as he opened
his mouth to make the humiliating confession he realized, quite
suddenly, why it was that he had lied--he wished to appear well in the
eyes of this savage, half-clothed girl.

He, Waldo Emerson Smith-Jones, craved the applause of a barbarian, and
to win it had simulated that physical prowess which generations of
Smith-Joneses had viewed from afar--disgusted, disapproving.

The girl repeated her question.

"Oh," said Waldo, "it is really quite simple. After I catch them I beat
them severely with a stick."

The girl sighed.

"How wonderful!" she said.

Waldo became the victim of a number of unpleasant
emotions--mortification for this suddenly developed moral turpitude;
apprehension for the future, when the girl might discover him in his
true colors; fear, consuming, terrible fear, that she might insist upon
his going forth at once to slay Nagoola.

But she did nothing of the kind, and presently the panther tired of
watching them and turned back into the tangle of bushes behind him.

It was with a sigh of relief that Waldo saw him depart.