THE WILD PEOPLE


The creature was naked except for a bit of hide that hung from a
leathern waist thong.

If Waldo viewed the newcomer with wonder, it was no less than the
wonder which the sight of him inspired in the breast of the hairy
one, for what he saw was as truly remarkable to his eyes as was his
appearance to those of the cultured Bostonian. And Waldo did indeed
present a most startling exterior. His six-feet-two was accentuated by
his extreme skinniness; his gray eyes looked weak and watery within the
inflamed circles which rimmed them, and which had been produced by loss
of sleep and much weeping.

His yellow hair was tangled and matted, and streaked with dirt and
blood. Blood stained his soiled and tattered ducks. His shirt was but a
mass of frayed ribbons held to him at all only by the neckband.

As he stood helplessly staring with bulging eyes at the awful figure
glowering at him from the forest his jaw dropped, his knees trembled,
and he seemed about to collapse from sheer terror.

Then the hideous man crouched and came creeping warily toward him.

With an agonized scream Waldo turned and fled toward the cliff. A quick
glance over his shoulder brought another series of shrieks from the
frightened fugitive, for it revealed not alone the fact that the awful
man was pursuing him, but that behind him raced at least a dozen more
equally frightful.

Waldo ran toward the cliffs only because that direction lay straight
away from his pursuers. He had no idea what he should do when he
reached the rocky barrier--he was far too frightened to think.

His pursuers were gaining upon him, their savage yells mingling with
his piercing cries and spurring him on to undreamed-of pinnacles of
speed.

As he ran, his knees came nearly to his shoulders at each frantic
bound; his left hand was extended far ahead, clutching wildly at the
air as though he were endeavoring to pull himself ahead, while his
right hand, still grasping the cudgel, described a rapid circle, like
the arm of a windmill gone mad. In action Waldo was an inspiring
spectacle.

At the foot of the cliff he came to a momentary halt, while he glanced
hurriedly about for a means of escape; but now he saw that the enemy
had spread out toward the right and left, leaving no means of escape
except up the precipitous side of the cliff. Up this narrow trails led
steeply from ledge to ledge.

In places crude ladders scaled perpendicular heights from one tier of
caves to the next above; but to Waldo the thing which confronted him
seemed absolutely unscalable, and then another backward glance showed
him the rapidly nearing enemy; and he launched himself at the face of
that seemingly impregnable barrier, clutching desperately with fingers
and toes.

His progress was impeded by the cudgel to which he still clung, but
he did not drop it; though why it would have been difficult to tell,
unless it was that his acts were now purely mechanical, there being no
room in his mind for aught else than terror.

Close behind him came the foremost cave man; yet, though he had
acquired the agility of a monkey through a lifetime of practice, he
was amazed at the uncanny speed with which Waldo Emerson clawed his
shrieking way aloft.

Half-way up the ascent, however, a great hairy hand came almost to his
ankle.

It was during the perilous negotiation of one of the loose and wabbly
ladders--little more than small trees leaning precariously against the
perpendicular rocky surface--that the nearest foeman came so close to
the fugitive; but at the top chance intervened to save Waldo, for a
time at least. It was at the moment that he scrambled frantically to a
tiny ledge from the frightfully slipping sapling.

In his haste he did by accident what a resourceful man would have done
by intent--in pushing himself onto the ledge he kicked the ladder
outward--for a second it hung toppling in the balance, and then with a
lunge crashed down the cliff's face with its human burden, in its fall
scraping others of the pursuing horde with it.

A chorus of rage came up from below him, but Waldo had not even turned
his head to learn of his temporary good fortune. Up, ever up he sped,
until at length he stood upon the topmost ledge, facing an overhanging
wall of blank rock that towered another twenty-five feet above him to
the summit of the bluff. Time and again he leaped futilely against the
smooth surface, tearing at it with his nails in a mad endeavor to climb
still higher.

At his right was the low opening to a black cave, but he did not see
it--his mind could cope with but the single idea: to clamber from
the horrible creatures which pursued him. But finally it was borne
in on his half-mad brain that this was the end--he could fly no
farther--here, in a moment more, death would overtake him.

He turned to meet it, and below saw a number of the cave men placing
another ladder in lieu of that which had fallen. In a moment they were
resuming the ascent after him.

On the narrow ledge above them the young man stood, chattering and
grinning like a madman. His pitiful cries were now punctuated with the
hollow coughing which his violent exercise had induced.

Tears rolled down his begrimed face, leaving crooked, muddy streaks in
their wake. His knees smote together so violently that he could barely
stand, and it was into the face of this apparition of cowardice that
the first of the cave men looked as he scrambled above the ledge on
which Waldo stood.

And then, of a sudden, there rose within the breast of Waldo Emerson
Smith-Jones a spark that generations of overrefinement and emasculating
culture had all but extinguished--the instinct of self-preservation by
force. Heretofore it had been purely by flight.

With the frenzy of the fear of death upon him, he raised his cudgel,
and, swinging it high above his head, brought it down full upon the
unprotected skull of his enemy.

Another took the fallen man's place--he, too, went down with a broken
head. Waldo was fighting now like a cornered rat, and through it all
he chattered and gibbered; but he no longer wept.

At first he was horrified at the bloody havoc he wrought with his
crude weapon. His nature revolted at the sight of blood, and when
he saw it mixed with matted hair along the side of his cudgel, and
realized that it was human hair and human blood, and that he, Waldo
Emerson Smith-Jones, had struck the blows that had plastered it there
so thickly in all its hideousness, a wave of nausea swept over him, so
that he almost toppled from his dizzy perch.

For a few minutes there was a lull in hostilities while the cave men
congregated below, shaking their fists at Waldo and crying out threats
and challenges. The young man stood looking down upon them, scarcely
able to realize that alone he had met savage men in physical encounter
and defeated them.

He was shocked and horrified; not, odd to say, because of the thing he
had done, but rather because of a strange and unaccountable glow of
pride in his brutal supremacy over brutes. What would his mother have
thought could she have seen her precious boy now?

Suddenly Waldo became conscious from the corner of his eye that
something was creeping upon him from behind out of the dark cave before
which he had fought. Simultaneously with the realization of it he
swung his cudgel in a wicked blow at this new enemy as he turned to
meet it.

The creature dodged back, and the blow that would have crushed its
skull grazed a hairbreadth from its face.

Waldo struck no second blow, and the cold sweat sprang to his forehead
when he realized how nearly he had come to murdering a young girl.
She crouched now in the mouth of the cave, eying him fearfully. Waldo
removed his tattered cap, bowing low.

"I crave your pardon," he said. "I had no idea that there was a lady
here. I am very glad that I did not injure you."

There must have been something either in his tone or manner that
reassured her, for she smiled and came out upon the ledge beside him.

As she did so a scarlet flush mantled Waldo's face and neck and
ears--he could feel them burning. With a nervous cough he turned and
became intently occupied with the distant scenery.

Presently he cast a surreptitious glance behind him. Shocking! She was
still there. Again he coughed nervously.

"Excuse me," he said. "But--er--ah--you--I am a total stranger, you
know; hadn't you better go back in, and--er--get your clothes?"

She made no reply, and so he forced himself to turn toward her once
more. She was smiling at him.

Waldo had never been so horribly embarrassed in all his life before--it
was a distinct shock to him to realize that the girl was not
embarrassed at all.

He spoke to her a second time, and at last she answered; but in
a tongue which he did not understand. It bore not the slightest
resemblance to any language, modern or dead, with which he was
familiar, and Waldo was more or less master of them all--especially the
dead ones.

He tried not to look at her after that, for he realized that he must
appear very ridiculous.

But now his attention was required by more pressing affairs--the cave
men were returning to the attack. They carried stones this time, and,
while some of them threw the missiles at Waldo, the others attempted
to rush his position. It was then that the girl hurried back into the
cave, only to reappear a moment later carrying some stone utensils in
her arms.

There was a huge mortar in which she had collected a pestle and several
smaller pieces of stone. She pushed them along the ledge to Waldo.

At first he did not grasp the meaning of her act; but presently she
pretended to pick up an imaginary missile and hurl it down upon the
creatures below--then she pointed to the things she had brought and to
Waldo.

He understood. So she was upon his side. He did not understand why, but
he was glad.

Following her suggestion, he gathered up a couple of the smaller
objects and hurled them down upon the men beneath.

But on and on they came--Waldo was not a very good shot. The girl was
busy now gathering such of the cave men's missiles as fell upon the
ledge. These she placed in a pile beside Waldo.

Occasionally the young man would strike an enemy by accident, and then
she would give a little scream of pleasure--clapping her hands and
jumping up and down.

It was not long before Waldo was surprised to find that this applause
fell sweetly upon his ears. It was then that he began to take better
aim.

In the midst of it all there flashed suddenly upon him a picture of his
devoted mother and the select coterie of intellectual young people with
which she had always surrounded him.

Waldo felt a new pang of horror as he tried to realize with what
emotions they would look upon him now as he stood upon the face of a
towering cliff beside an almost naked girl hurling rocks down upon the
heads of hairy men who hopped about, screaming with rage, below him.

It was awful! A great billow of mortification rolled over him.

He turned to cast a look of disapprobation at the shameless young woman
behind him--she should not think that he countenanced such coarse and
vulgar proceedings. Their eyes met--in hers he saw the sparkle of
excitement and the joy of life and such a look of comradeship as he
never before had seen in the eyes of another mortal.

Then she pointed excitedly over the edge of the ledge.

Waldo looked.

A great brute of a cave man had crawled, unseen, almost to their refuge.

He was but five feet below them, and at the moment that he looked up
Waldo dropped a fifty-pound stone mortar full upon his upturned face.

The young woman emitted a little shriek of joy, and Waldo Emerson
Smith-Jones, his face bisected by a broad grin, turned toward her.