A CHOICE


Seamen upon the beach were filling water-casks.

There were a dozen of them, and as Waldo plunged from the forest they
looked with startled apprehension at the strange apparition. A great,
brown giant they saw, clad in a few ragged strings of white duck, for
Waldo had kept his apparel as immaculately clean as hard rubbing in
cold water would permit.

In one hand the strange creature carried a long, bloody spear, in the
other a light cudgel. Long, yellow hair streamed back over his broad
shoulders.

Several of the men--those who were armed--leveled guns and revolvers at
him; but when, as he drew closer, they saw a broad grin upon his face,
and heard in perfectly good English, "Don't shoot; I'm a white man,"
they lowered their weapons and awaited him.

He had scarcely reached them when they saw a swarm of naked men dash
from the forest in his wake. Waldo saw their eyes directed past him and
knew that his pursuers had come into view.

"You'll have to shoot at them, I imagine," he said. "They're not
exactly domesticated. Try firing over their heads at first; maybe you
can scare them away without hurting any of them."

He disliked the idea of seeing the poor savages slaughtered. It didn't
seem just like fair play to mow them down with bullets.

The sailors followed his suggestion. At the first reports the cave men
halted in surprise and consternation.

"Let's rush 'em," suggested one of the men, and this was all that was
needed to send them scurrying back into the woods.

Waldo found that the ship was English, and that all the men spoke his
mother tongue in more or less understandable fashion. The second mate,
who was in charge of the landing party, proved to have originated in
Boston. It was much like being at home again.

Waldo was so excited and wanted to ask so many questions all at once
that he became almost unintelligible. It seemed scarcely possible that
a ship had really come.

He realized now that he had never actually entertained any very
definite belief that a ship ever would come to this out-of-the-way
corner of the world. He had hoped and dreamed, but down in the bottom
of his heart he must have felt that years might elapse before he would
be rescued.

Even now it was difficult to believe that these were really civilized
beings like himself.

They were on their way to a civilized world; they would soon be
surrounded by their families and friends, and he, Waldo Emerson
Smith-Jones, was going with them!

In a few months he would see his mother and his father and all his
friends--he would be among his books once more.

Even as the last thought flashed through his mind it was succeeded by
mild wonderment that this outlook failed to raise his temperature as he
might have expected that it would. His books had been his real life in
the past--could it be that they had lost something of their glamour?
Had his brief experience with the realities of life dulled the edge of
his appetite for second-hand hopes, aspirations, deeds, and emotions?

It had.

Waldo yet craved his books, but they alone would no longer suffice. He
wanted something bigger, something more real and tangible--he wanted to
read and study, but even more he wanted to do. And back there in his
own world there would be plenty awaiting the doing.

His heart thrilled at the possibilities that lay before the new
Waldo Emerson--possibilities of which he never would have dreamed
but for the strange chance which had snatched him bodily from one
life to throw him into this new one, which had forced upon him the
development of attributes of self-reliance, courage, initiative, and
resourcefulness that would have lain dormant within him always but for
the necessity which had given birth to them.

Yes, Waldo realized that he owed a great deal to this experience--a
great deal to--. And then a sudden realization of the truth rushed in
upon him--he owed everything to Nadara.

"I was never ship-wrecked on a desert island," said the second mate,
breaking in upon Waldo's reveries, "but I can imagine just about how
good you feel at the thought that you are at last rescued and that in
an hour or so you will see the shoreline of your prison growing smaller
and smaller upon the southern horizon."

"Yes," acquiesced Waldo in a far away voice: "it's awfully good of you,
but I am not going with you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later Waldo Emerson stood alone upon the beach, watching the
diminishing hull of a great ship as it dropped over the rim of the
world far to the north.

A vague hint of tears dimmed his vision; then he threw back his
shoulders, swallowed the thing that had risen into his throat, and
with high held head turned back into the forest.

In one hand he carried a razor and a plug of tobacco--the sole mementos
of his recent brief contact with the world of civilization. The kindly
sailors had urged him to reconsider his decision, but when he remained
obdurate they had insisted that they be permitted to leave some of the
comforts of life with him.

The only thing that he could think of that he wanted very badly
was a razor--firearms he would not accept, for he had worked out a
rather fine chivalry of his own here in this savage world--a chivalry
which would not permit him to take any advantage over the primeval
inhabitants he had found here other than what his own hands and head
might give him.

At the last moment one of the seamen, prompted by a generous heart and
a keen realization of what life must be without even bare necessities,
had thrust upon Waldo the plug of tobacco. As he looked at it now the
young man smiled.

"That would indeed be the last step, according to mother's ideas," he
soliloquized. "No lower could I sink."

The ship that bore away Waldo's chance of escape carried also a long
letter to Waldo's mother. In portions it was rather vague and rambling.
It mentioned, among other things, that he had an obligation to fulfil
before he could leave his present habitat; but that the moment he was
free he should "take the first steamer for Boston."

The skipper of the ship which had just sailed away had told Waldo
that in so far as he knew there might never be another ship touch
his island, which was so far out of the beaten course that only the
shoreline of it had ever been explored, and scarce a score of vessels
had reported it since Captain Cook discovered it in 1773.

Yet it was in the face of this that Waldo had refused to leave. As
he walked slowly through the wood on his way back toward his cave he
tried to convince himself that he had acted purely from motives of
gratitude and fairness--that as a gentleman he could do no less than
see Nadara and thank her for the friendly services she had rendered
him; but for some reason this seemed a very futile and childish excuse
for relinquishing what might easily be his only opportunity to return
to civilization.

His final decision was that he had acted the part of a fool; yet as he
walked he hummed a joyous tune, and his heart was full of happiness and
pleasant expectations of what he could not have told.

To one thing he had made up his mind, and that was that the next sun
would see him on his way to the village of Nadara. His experience with
the savages that day had convinced him that he might with reasonable
safety face Flatfoot and Korth.

The more he dwelt upon this idea the more light-hearted he became--he
could not understand it. He should be plunged into the blackest
despair, for had he not but just relinquished a chance to return
home, and was he not within a day or two to enter the village of the
ferocious Flatfoot and the mighty Korth? Even so, his heart sang.

Waldo saw nothing of his enemies of the earlier part of the day as
he moved cautiously through the forest or crossed the little plains
and meadows which lay along the route between the ocean and his lair;
but his thoughts often reverted to them and to his adventures of the
morning, and the result was that he became aware of a deficiency in his
equipment--a deficiency which his recent battle made glaringly apparent.

In fact, there were two points that might be easily remedied. One was
the lack of a shield. Had he had protection of this nature he would
have been in comparatively little danger from the shower of missiles
that the savages had flung at him.

The other was a sword. With a sword and shield he could have let his
enemies come to very close quarters with perfect impunity to himself
and then have run them through with infinite ease.

This new idea would necessitate a delay in his plans; he must finish
both shield and sword before he departed for the village of Flatfoot.
What with his meditation and his planning, Waldo had made poor time on
the return journey from the coast so that it was after sunset when he
entered the last deep ravine beyond the farther summit of which lay
his rocky home. In the depths of the ravine it was already quite dark,
though a dim twilight still hung upon the surrounding hill-tops.

He had about completed the arduous ascent of the last steep trail, at
the crest of which was his journey's end, when above him, silhouetted
against the darkening sky, loomed a great black, crouching mass, from
the center of which blazed two balls of fire.

It was Nagoola, and he occupied the center of the only trail that led
over the edge of the ridge from the ravine below.

"I had almost forgotten you, Nagoola," murmured Waldo Emerson. "I could
never have gone upon my journey without first interviewing you, but I
could have wished a different time and place than this. Let us postpone
the matter for a day or so," he concluded aloud; but the only response
from Nagoola was an ominous growl. Waldo felt rather uncomfortable.

He could not have come upon the great, black panther at a more
inopportune time or place. It was too dark for Waldo's human eyes, and
the cat was above him and Waldo upon a steep hillside that under the
best of conditions offered but a precarious foothold. He tried to shoo
the formidable beast away by shouts and menacing gesticulations, but
Nagoola would not shoo.

Instead he crept slowly forward, edging his sinuous body inch by inch
along the rocky trail until it hung poised above the waiting man a
dozen feet below him.

Six months before Waldo would long since have been shrieking in
meteorlike flight down the bed of the ravine behind him. That a
wonderful transformation had been wrought within him was evident from
the fact that no cry of fright escaped him, and that, far from fleeing,
he edged inch by inch upward toward the menacing creature hanging there
above him. He carried his spear with the point leveled a trifle below
those baleful eyes.

He had advanced but a foot or two, however, when, with an awful shriek,
the terrible beast launched itself full upon him.

As the heavy body struck him Waldo went over backward down the cliff,
and with him went Nagoola.

Clawing, tearing, and scratching, the two rolled and bounded down
the rocky hillside until, near the bottom, they came to a sudden stop
against a large tree.

The growling and screeching ceased, the clawing paws and hands were
still. Presently the tropic moon rose over the hill-top to look down
upon a little tangled mound of man and beast that lay very quiet
against the bole of a great tree near the bottom of a dark ravine.