THE SEEKER


When the old man saw what had happened he ran forward and grasped
Nadara by the wrist.

"Quick!" he cried--"quick, my daughter! You have killed him who would
have saved you, and now nothing but flight may keep Korth from having
his way with you."

As in a trance the girl turned and departed with him.

They had scarcely disappeared within the underbrush when Waldo returned
to consciousness, so slight had been the effect of the blow upon his
head.

To his surprise he found the cave man lying very still beside him, but
an instant later he read the reason for it in the little projecting
ridge of rock upon which lay his foe's forehead--in falling the savage
man had struck thus and lost consciousness.

Almost immediately the hairy one opened his eyes, but before he could
gather his scattered senses sinewy fingers found his throat, and he
lapsed once more into oblivion--from which there was no awakening.

As Waldo staggered to his feet he saw that the girl had vanished, and
there swept back into his mind the memory of the hate that had been in
her face as she struck him down.

It seemed incredible that she should have turned against him so, and
at the very moment, too, when he had risked his life in her service;
but that she had there could be no doubt, for he had seen her cast
the stone--with his own eyes he had seen her, and, too, he had seen
the hatred and loathing in her face as she looked straight into his.
But what he had not seen was the look of horror that followed as the
missile struck him instead of Korth, sending him crumpling to earth.

Slowly Waldo turned away from the scene of battle, and without even a
second look at his vanquished enemy limped painfully into the brush.
His heart was very heavy and he was weak from exhaustion and loss
of blood, but he staggered on, back toward his mountain lair, as he
thought, until unable to go further he sank down upon a little grassy
knoll and slept.

When Nadara recovered from the shock of the thing she had done
sufficiently to reason for herself she realized that after all Thandar
might not be dead, and though the old man protested long and loudly
against it, she insisted upon retracing her steps toward the spot where
they had left the yellow giant in the clutches of Korth.

Very cautiously the girl threaded her way through the maze of shrubbery
and creepers that filled the intervening space between the forest
trees, until she came silently to the edge of the clearing in which the
two had fought.

As she peered anxiously through the last curtain of foliage she saw a
single body lying quiet and still upon the sward, and an instant later
recognized it as Korth's. For several minutes she watched it before she
became convinced that the man who had so terrorized her whole childish
life could never again offer her harm.

She looked about for Thandar, but he was nowhere to be seen. Nadara
could scarcely believe that her eyes were not deceiving her.

It was incredible that the yellow one could have gone down to
unconsciousness before her unintentional blow and yet have mastered the
mighty Korth; but how else could Korth have met his death and Thandar
be gone?

She approached quite close to the dead man, turning the body over with
her foot until the throat was visible. There she saw the finger-marks
that had done the work, and with a little thrill of pride she turned
back into the forest, calling Thandar's name aloud.

But Thandar did not hear. Half a mile away he lay weak and unconscious
from loss of blood.

Morning found Nadara sleeping in a sturdy tree upon the trail along
which Waldo had followed Korth. She had discovered the footprints
of the two men the evening before while she had been searching
unsuccessfully for the trail which Waldo had followed after the battle.
She hoped now that the spoor might lead her to Thandar's cave, to which
she felt it quite possible he might have returned by another way.

When the girl awoke she again took up her journey, following the tracks
as unerringly as a hound up through the hilly country, across the
divide and down into the jungle to the very watering place at which her
tribe had drank a few days earlier. Here she made a brief stay.

Then on again down the river, back through the jungle and onto the
divide once more. She was much mystified by the windings of the trail,
but for days she followed the fading spoor until, becoming fainter and
fainter as it grew older, she lost it entirely at last.

She was quite sure by now, however, that it led from her tribe's former
territory, and so she kept on, hoping against hope, that soon she would
come across the fresh track of Thandar where he had passed her on his
return journey to his home.

Nadara had eluded the old man when she started upon her search for
Thandar, so it was that the old fellow returned to the dwellings of
his people alone the following day.

Flatfoot was the first to greet him.

"Where is the girl?" he growled. "And where is Korth? Has he taken her?
Answer me the truth or I will break every bone in your carcass."

"I do not know where the girl is," answered the old man truthfully
enough, "but Korth lies dead in the little glade beyond the three great
trees. A mighty man killed him as he was dragging Nadara off into the
thicket----"

"And the man has taken the girl for himself?" yelled Flatfoot. "You old
thief you. This is some of your work. Always have you tried to cheat
me of this girl since first you knew that I desired her. Whither went
they? Quick! before I kill you."

"I do not know," replied the old man. "For hours I searched, until
darkness came, but neither of them could I find, and my old eyes are no
longer keen for trailing, so I was forced to abandon my hunt and return
here when morning came."

"By the three trees the trail starts, you say?" cried Flatfoot. "That
is enough--I shall find them. And when I return with the girl it will
be time enough to kill you; now it would delay me too much," and with
that the cave man hurried away into the forest.

It took him half a day to find Nadara's trail, but at last his search
was rewarded, and as she had made no effort to hide it he moved rapidly
along in the wake of the unsuspecting girl; but he was not as swift as
she, and the chase bid fair to be a long one.

When Waldo woke he found the sun beating down upon his face, and though
he was lame and sore he felt quite strong enough to continue his
journey; but whither he should go he did not know.

Now that Nadara had turned against him the island held nothing for him,
and he was on the point of starting back toward his far distant lair
from where he might visit the ocean often to watch for a passing ship,
when the sudden decision came to him to see the girl again, regardless
of her evident hostility, and learn from her own lips the exact reason
of her hatred for him.

He had had no idea that the loss of her friendship would prove such
a blow to him, so that his pride suffered as well as his heart as he
contemplated his harrowed emotions.

Of course he was reasonably sure that Nadara's attitude was due to
his ungallant desertion, for which act he had long suffered the most
acute pangs of remorse and contrition. Yet he felt that her apparent
vindictiveness was not warranted by even the grave offense against
chivalry and gratitude of which he had been guilty.

It presently occurred to him that by the traitorous attack which
he believed that she had made upon him while he was acting in her
defense she had forfeited every claim which her former kindness might
have given her upon him, but with this realization came another--a
humiliating thought--he still wished to see her!

He, Waldo Emerson Smith-Jones, had become so devoid of pride that he
would voluntarily search out one who had wronged and outraged his
friendship, with the avowed determination of seeking a reconciliation.
It was unthinkable, and yet, as he admitted the impossibility of it, he
set forth in search of her.

Waldo wondered not a little at the strange emotion--inherent gregarious
instinct, he thought it--which drew him toward Nadara.

It did not occur to him that during all the past solitary months he had
scarcely missed the old companionship of his Back Bay friends; that for
once that they had been the subject of his reveries the cave girl had
held the center of that mental stage a thousand times.

He failed to realize that it was not the companionship of the many that
he craved; that it was not the community instinct, or that his strange
longing could be satisfied by but a single individual. No, Waldo
Emerson did not know what was the matter with him, nor was it likely
that he ever would find out before it was too late.

The young man attempted to retrace his steps to the battle-ground of
the previous day, but he had been so dazed after the encounter that
he had no clear recollection of the direction he had taken after he
quitted the glade.

So it was that he stumbled in precisely the opposite direction,
presently emerging from the underbrush almost at the foot of a low
cliff tunneled with many caves. All about were the morose, unhappy
community whose savage lives were spent in almost continual wandering
from one filthy, comfortless warren to another equally foul and
wretched.

At sight of them Waldo did not flee in dismay, as most certainly would
have been the case a few months earlier. Instead, he walked confidently
toward them.

As he approached they ceased whatever work they were engaged upon and
eyed him suspiciously. Then several burly males approached him warily.

At a hundred yards they halted.

"What do you want?" they cried. "If you come to our village we can kill
you."

Before Waldo could reply an old man crawled from a cave near the base
of the cliff, and as his eyes fell upon the stranger he hurried as
rapidly as his ancient limbs would carry him to the little knot of
ruffians who composed the reception committee.

He spoke to them for a moment in a low tone, and as he was talking
Waldo recognized him as the old man who had accompanied Nadara on the
previous day at the battle in the glade. When he had finished speaking
one of the cave men assented to whatever proposal the decrepit one had
made, and Waldo saw that each of the others nodded his head in approval.

Then the old man advanced slowly toward Waldo. When he had come quite
close he spoke.

"I am an old man," he said. "Thandar would not kill an old man?"

"Of course not; but how know you that my name is Thandar?" replied
Waldo.

"Nadara, she who is my daughter, has spoken of you often. Yesterday we
saw you as you battled with that son of Nagoola--Nadara told me then
that it was you. What would Thandar among the people of Flatfoot?"

"I come as a friend," replied Waldo, "among the friends of Nadara. For
Flatfoot I care nothing. He is no friend of Nadara, whose friends are
Thandar's friends, and whose enemies are Thandar's enemies. Where is
Nadara--but first, where is Flatfoot? I have come to kill him."

The words and the savage challenge slipped as easily from the cultured
tongue of Waldo Emerson Smith-Jones as though he had been born and
reared in the most rocky and barren cave of this savage island, nor did
they sound strange or unusual to him. It seemed that he had said the
most natural and proper thing under the circumstances that there was to
say.

"Flatfoot is not here," said the old man, "nor is Nadara. She--" but
here Waldo interrupted him.

"Korth, then," he demanded. "Where is Korth? I can kill him first and
Flatfoot when he returns."

The old man looked at the speaker in unfeigned surprise.

"Korth!" he exclaimed. "Korth is dead. Can it be that you do not know
that he, whom you killed yesterday, was Korth?"

Waldo's eyes opened as wide in surprise as had the old man's.

Korth! He had killed the redoubtable Korth with his bare hands--Korth,
who could crush the skull of a full-grown man with a single blow from
his open palm.

Clearly he recollected the very words in which Nadara had described
this horrible brute that time she had harrowed his poor, coward nerves,
as they approached the village of Flatfoot. And now he, Waldo Emerson
Smith-Jones, had met and killed the creature from whom he had so
fearfully fled a few months ago!

And, wonder of wonders, he had not even thought to use the weapons upon
which he had spent so many hours of handicraft and months of practise
in preparation for just this occasion. Of a sudden he recalled the old
man's statement that Nadara was not there.

"Where is she--Nadara?" he cried, turning so suddenly upon the ancient
one that the old fellow drew back in alarm.

"I have done nothing to harm her," he cried. "I followed and would have
brought her back, but I am old and could not find her. Once, when I was
young, there was no better trailer or mighty warrior among my people
than I, but----"

"Yes, yes," exclaimed Waldo impatiently; "but Nadara! Where is she?"

"I do not know," replied the old man. "She has gone, and I could not
find her. Well do I remember how, years ago, when the trail of an enemy
was faint or the signs of game hard to find, men would come to ask me
to help them, but now----"

"Of course," interrupted Waldo; "but Nadara. Do you not even know in
what direction she has gone?"

"No; but since Flatfoot has set forth upon her trail it should be easy
to track the two of them."

"Flatfoot set out after Nadara!" cried, Waldo. "Why?"

"For many moons he has craved her for his mate, as has Korth,"
explained Nadara's father; "but I think that each feared the other, and
because of that fact Nadara was saved from both; but at last Korth came
upon us alone and away from the village, and then he grasped Nadara and
would have taken her away, for Flatfoot was not about to prevent.

"You came then, and the rest you know. If I had been younger neither
Flatfoot nor Korth would have dared menace Nadara, for when I was a
young man I was very terrible and the record of my kills was a----"

"How long since did Flatfoot set out after Nadara?" Waldo broke in.

"But a few hours since," replied the old man. "It would be an easy
thing for me to overtake him by night had I the speed of my youth, for
I well remember----"

"From where did Flatfoot start upon the trail?" cried the young man.
"Lead me to the place."

"This way then, Thandar," said the other, starting off toward the
forest. "I will show you if you will save Nadara from Flatfoot. I love
her. She has been very kind and good to me. She is unlike the rest of
our people.

"I should die happy if I knew that you have saved her from Flatfoot,
but I am an old man and may not live until Nadara returns. Ah, that
reminds me; there is that in my cave which belongs to Nadara, and were
I to die there would be none to protect it for her.

"Will you wait for the moment that it will take me to run and fetch it,
that you may carry it to her, for I am sure that you will find her;
though I am not as sure that you will overcome Flatfoot if you meet
him. He is a very terrible man."

Waldo hated to waste a minute of the precious time that was allowing
Flatfoot to win nearer and nearer Nadara; but if it were in a service
for the girl who had been so kind to him and for the happiness of her
old father he could not refuse, so he waited impatiently while the old
fellow tottered off toward the caves.

Those who had come half-way to meet Waldo had hovered at a safe
distance while he had been speaking to Nadara's father, and when the
two turned toward the forest all had returned to their work in evident
relief; for the old man had told them that the stranger was the mighty
warrior who had killed the terrible Korth with his bare hands, nor had
the story lost anything in the telling.

After what seemed hours to the waiting Waldo the old man returned with
a little package carefully wrapped in the skin of a small rodent, the
seams laboriously sewed in a manner of lacing with pieces of gut.

"This is Nadara's," he said as they continued their way toward the
forest. "It contains many strange things of which I know not the
meaning or purpose. They all were taken from the body of her mother
when the woman died. You will give them to her?"

"Yes," said Waldo. "I will give them to Nadara, or die in the trying of
it."