DEATH'S DOORWAY


Late in the afternoon the girl suggested that they start that night
upon the journey toward her village.

"The bad men will not be abroad after dark," she said. "With you at my
side, I shall not fear Nagoola."

"How far is it to your village?" asked Waldo.

"It will take us three nights," she replied. "By day we must hide,
for even you could not vanquish a great number of bad men should they
attack you at once."

"No," said Waldo; "I presume not."

"It was very wonderful to watch you, though," she went on, "when you
battled upon the cliff-side, beating them down as they came upon you.
How brave you were! How terrible! You trembled from rage."

"Yes," admitted Waldo, "I was quite angry. I always tremble like that
when my ire is excited. Sometimes I get so bad that my knees knock
together. If you ever see them do that you will realize how exceedingly
angry I am."

"Yes," murmured the girl.

Presently Waldo saw that she was laughing quietly to herself.

A great fear rose in his breast. Could it be that she was less gullible
than she had appeared? Did she, after all, penetrate the bombast with
which he had sought to cloak his cowardice?

He finally mustered sufficient courage to ask: "Why do you laugh?"

"I think of the surprise that awaits old Flatfoot and Korth and the
others when I lead you to them."

"Why will they be surprised?" asked Waldo.

"At the way you will crack their heads."

Waldo shuddered.

"Why should I crack their heads?" he asked.

"Why should you crack their heads!" It was apparently incredible to the
girl that he should not understand.

"How little you know," she said. "You cannot swim, you do not know the
language which men may understand, you would be lost in the woods were
I to leave you, and now you say that you do not know that when you come
to a strange tribe they will try to kill you, and only take you as one
of them when you have proven your worth by killing at least one of
their strongest men."

"At least one!" said Waldo, half to himself.

He was dazed by this information. He had expected to be welcomed with
open arms into the best society that the girl's community afforded.
He had thought of it in just this way, for he had not even yet learned
that there might be a whole people living under entirely different
conditions than those which existed in Boston, Massachusetts.

Her reference to his ignorance also came as a distinct shock to him. He
had always considered himself a man of considerable learning. It had
been his secret boast and his mother's open pride.

And now to be pitied for his ignorance by one who probably thought the
earth flat, if she ever thought about such matters at all--by one who
could neither read nor write. And the worst of it all was that her
indictment was correct--only she had not gone far enough.

There was little of practical value that he did know. With the
realization of his limitations Waldo Emerson took, unknown to himself,
a great stride toward a broader wisdom than his narrow soul had ever
conceived.

That night, after the sun had set and the stars and moon come out, the
two set forth from their retreat toward the northwest, where the girl
said that the village of her people lay.

They walked hand in hand through the dark wood, the girl directing
their steps, the young man grasping his long cudgel in his right hand
and searching into the shadows for the terrible creatures conjured by
his cowardly brain, but mostly for the two awesome spots of fire which
he had gathered from the girl's talk would mark the presence of Nagoola.

Strange noises assailed his ears, and once the girl crouched close to
him as her quick ears caught the sound of the movement of a great body
through the underbrush at their left.

Waldo Emerson was almost paralyzed by terror; but at length the
creature, whatever it may have been, turned off into the forest
without molesting them. For several hours thereafter they suffered no
alarm, but the constant tension of apprehension on the man's already
over-wrought nerves had reduced him to a state of such abject nervous
terror that he was no longer master of himself.

So it was that when the girl suddenly halted him with an affrighted
little gasp and, pointing straight ahead, whispered, "Nagoola," he went
momentarily mad with fear.

For a bare instant he paused in his tracks, and then breaking away
from her, he raised his club above his head, and with an awful shriek
dashed--straight toward the panther.

In the minds of some there may be a doubt as to which of the two--the
sleek, silent, black cat or the grinning, screaming Waldo--was the most
awe-inspiring.

Be that as it may, it was quite evident that no doubt assailed the mind
of the cat, for with a single answering scream, he turned and faded
into the blackness of the black night.

But Waldo did not see him go. Still shrieking, he raced on through the
forest until he tripped over a creeper and fell exhausted to the earth.
There he lay panting, twitching, and trembling until the girl found
him, an hour after sunrise.

At the sound of her voice he would have struggled to his feet and
dashed on into the woods, for he felt that he could never face her
again after the spectacle of cowardice with which he had treated her a
few hours before.

But even as he gained his feet her first words reassured him, and
dissipated every vestige of his intention to elude her.

"Did you catch him?" she cried.

"No," panted Waldo Emerson quite truthfully. "He got away."

They rested a little while, and then Waldo insisted that they resume
their journey by day instead of by night. He had positively determined
that he never should or could endure another such a night of mental
torture. He would much rather take the chance of meeting with the bad
men than suffer the constant feeling that unseen enemies were peering
out of the darkness at him every moment.

In the day they would at least have the advantage of seeing their foes
before they were struck. He did not give these reasons to the girl,
however. Under the circumstances he felt that another explanation would
be better adapted to her ears.

"You see," he said, "if it hadn't been so dark Nagoola might not have
escaped me. It is too bad--too bad."

"Yes," agreed the girl, "it is too bad. We shall travel by day. It will
be safe now. We have left the country of the bad men, and there are few
men living between us and my people."

That night they spent in a cave they found in the steep bank of a small
river.

It was damp and muddy and cold, but they were both very tired, and so
they fell asleep and slept as soundly as though the best of mattresses
lay beneath them. The girl probably slept better, since she had never
been accustomed to anything much superior to this in all her life.

The journey required five days, instead of three, and during all the
time Waldo was learning more and more woodcraft from the girl. At first
his attitude had been such that he could profit but little from her
greater practical knowledge, for he had been inclined to look down upon
her as an untutored savage.

Now, however, he was a willing student, and when Waldo Emerson elected
to study there was nothing that he could not master and retain in a
remarkable manner. He had a well-trained mind--the principal trouble
with it being that it had been crammed full of useless knowledge. His
mother had always made the error of confusing knowledge with wisdom.

Waldo was not the only one to learn new things upon this journey. The
girl learned something, too--something which had been threatening for
days to rise above the threshold of her conscious mind, and now she
realized that it had lain in her heart almost ever since the first
moment that she had been with this strange young man.

Waldo Emerson had been endowed by nature with a chivalrous heart, and
his training had been such that he mechanically accorded to all women
the gallant little courtesies and consideration which are of the fine
things that go with breeding. Nor was he one whit less punctilious in
his relations with this wild cave girl than he would have been with the
daughter of the finest family of his own aristocracy.

He had been kind and thoughtful and sympathetic always, and to the
girl, who had never been accustomed to such treatment from men, nor
had ever seen a man accord it to any woman, it seemed little short of
miraculous that such gentle tenderness could belong to a nature so
warlike and ferocious as that with which she had endowed Waldo Emerson.
But she was quite satisfied that it should be so.

She would not have cared for him had he been gentle with her, yet
cowardly. Had she dreamed of the real truth--had she had the slightest
suspicion that Waldo Emerson was at heart the most arrant poltroon
upon whom the sun had ever shone, she would have loathed and hated
him, for in the primitive code of ethics which governed the savage
community which was her world there was no place for the craven or the
weakling--and Waldo Emerson was both.

As the realization of her growing sentiment toward the man awakened, it
imparted to her ways with him a sudden coyness and maidenly aloofness
which had been entirely wanting before. Until then their companionship,
in so far as the girl was concerned, had been rather that of one
youth toward another; but now that she found herself thrilling at his
slightest careless touch, she became aware of a paradoxical impulse to
avoid him.

For the first time in her life, too, she realized her nakedness, and
was ashamed. Possibly this was due to the fact that Waldo appeared so
solicitous in endeavoring to coerce his rags into the impossible feat
of entirely covering his body.

As they neared their journey's end Waldo became more and more perturbed.

During the last night horrible visions of Flatfoot and Korth haunted
his dreams. He saw the great, hairy beasts rushing upon him in all the
ferocity of their primeval savagery--tearing him limb from limb in
their bestial rage.

With a shriek he awoke.

To the girl's startled inquiry he replied that he had been but dreaming.

"Did you dream of Flatfoot and Korth?" she laughed. "Of the things that
you will do to them tomorrow?"

"Yes," replied Waldo; "I dreamed of Flatfoot and Korth." But the girl
did not see how he trembled and hid his head in the hollow of his arm.

The last day's march was the most agonizing experience of Waldo
Emerson's life. He was positive that he was going to his death, but to
him the horror of the thing lay more in the manner of his coming death
than in the thought of death itself. As a matter of fact, he had again
reached a point when he would have welcomed death.

The future held for him nothing but a life of discomfort and misery and
constant mental anguish, superinduced by the condition of awful fear
under which he must drag out his existence in this strange and terrible
land.

Waldo had not the slightest conception as to whether he was upon some
mainland or an unknown island. That the tidal wave had come upon them
somewhere in the South Pacific was all that he knew; but long since he
had given up hope that succor would reach him in time to prevent him
perishing miserably far from his home and his poor mother.

He could not dwell long upon this dismal theme, because it always
brought tears of self-pity to his eyes, and for some unaccountable
reason Waldo shrunk from the thought of exhibiting this unmanly
weakness before the girl.

All day long he racked his brain for some valid excuse whereby he might
persuade his companion to lead him elsewhere than to her village. A
thousand times better would be some secluded little garden such as that
which had harbored them for the ten days following their escape from
the cave men.

If they could but come upon such a place near the coast, where Waldo
could keep a constant watch for passing vessels, he would have been as
happy as he ever expected it would be possible for him in such a savage
land.

He wanted the girl with him for companionship; he was more afraid when
he was alone. Of course, he realized that she was no fit companion
for a man of his mental attainments; but then she was a human being,
and her society much better than none at all. While hope had still
lingered that he might live to escape and return to his beloved Boston,
he had often wondered whether he would dare tell his mother of his
unconventional acquaintance with this young woman.

Of course, it would be out of the question for him to go at all into
details. He would not, for example, dare to attempt a description of
her toilet to his prim parent.

The fact that they had been alone together, day and night for weeks was
another item which troubled Waldo considerably. He knew that the shock
of such information might prostrate his mother, and for a long time he
debated the wisdom of omitting any mention of the girl whatever.

At length he decided that a little, white lie would be permissible,
inasmuch as his mother's health and the girl's reputation were both at
stake. So he had decided to mention that the girl's aunt had been with
them in the capacity of chaperon; that fixed it nicely, and on this
point Waldo's mind was more at ease.

Late in the afternoon they wound down a narrow trail that led from
the plateau into a narrow, beautiful valley. A tree-bordered river
meandered through the center of the level plain that formed the
valley's floor, while beyond rose precipitous cliffs, which trailed
off in either direction as far as the eye could reach.

"There live my people," said the girl, pointing toward the distant
barrier.

Waldo groaned inwardly.

"Let us rest here," he said, "until tomorrow, that we may come to your
home rested and refreshed."

"Oh, no," cried the girl; "we can reach the caves before dark. I can
scarcely wait until I shall have seen how you shall slay Flatfoot, and
maybe Korth also. Though I think that after one of them has felt your
might the others will be glad to take you into the tribe at the price
of your friendship."

"Is there not some way," ventured the distracted Waldo, "that I may
come into your village without fighting? I should dislike to kill one
of your friends," said Waldo solemnly.

The girl laughed.

"Neither Flatfoot nor Korth are friends of mine," she replied; "I hate
them both. They are terrible men. It would be better for all the tribe
were they killed. They are so strong and cruel that we all hate them,
since they use their strength to abuse those who are weaker.

"They make us all work very hard for them. They take other men's mates,
and if the other men object they kill them. There is scarcely a moon
passes that does not see either Korth or Flatfoot kill some one.

"Nor is it always men they kill. Often when they are angry they kill
women and little children just for the pleasure of killing; but when
you come among us there will be no more of that, for you will kill them
both if they be not good."

Waldo was too horrified by this description of his soon-to-be
antagonists to make any reply--his tongue clave to the roof of his
mouth--all his vocal organs seemed paralyzed.

But the girl did not notice. She went on joyously, ripping Waldo's
nervous system out of him and tearing it into shreds.

"You see," she continued, "Flatfoot and Korth are greater than the
other men of my tribe. They can do as they will. They are frightful to
look upon, and I have often thought that the hearts of others dried up
when they saw either of them coming for them.

"And they are so strong! I have seen Korth crush the skull of a
full-grown man with a single blow from his open palm; while one of
Flatfoot's amusements is the breaking of men's arms and legs with his
bare hands."

They had entered the valley now, and in silence they continued on
toward the fringe of trees which grew beside the little river.

Nadara led the way toward a ford, which they quickly crossed. All the
way across the valley Waldo had been searching for some avenue of
escape.

He dared not enter that awful village and face those terrible men,
and he was almost equally averse to admitting to the girl that he was
afraid.

He would gladly have died to have escaped either alternative, but he
preferred to choose the manner of his death.

The thought of entering the village and meeting a horrible end at the
hands of the brutes who awaited him there and of being compelled to
demonstrate before the girl's eyes that he was neither a mighty fighter
nor a hero was more than he could endure.

Occupied with these harrowing speculations, Waldo and Nadara came to
the farther side of the forest, whence they could see the towering
cliffs rising steeply from the valley's bed, three hundred yards away.

Along their face and at their feet Waldo descried a host of half-naked
men, women, and children moving about in the consummation of their
various duties. Involuntarily he halted.

The girl came to his side. Together they looked out upon the scene, the
like of which Waldo Emerson never before had seen.

It was as though he had been suddenly snatched back through countless
ages to a long-dead past and dropped into the midst of the prehistoric
life of his paleolithic progenitors.

Upon the narrow ledges before their caves, women, with long, flowing
hair, ground food in rude stone mortars.

Naked children played about them, perilously close to the precipitous
cliff edge.

Hairy men squatted, gorillalike, before pieces of flat stone, upon
which green hides were stretched, while they scraped, scraped, scraped
with the sharp edge of smaller bits of stone.

There was no laughter and no song.

Occasionally Waldo saw one of the fierce creatures address another, and
sometimes one would raise his thick lips in a nasty snarl that exposed
his fighting fangs; but they were too far away for their words to reach
the young man.