HOMEWARD BOUND


At Honolulu Waldo Emerson Smith-Jones and Nadara were married. Before
the ceremony there had been some discussion as to what name should be
used in describing Nadara in the formal contract.

"Nadara" alone seemed too brief and meaningless to the precise Mrs.
Smith-Jones; but Waldo Emerson and the girl insisted that it was her
name and all-sufficient. So, in lieu of another name, it was finally
decided by all that "Nadara" could not be legally improved upon.

Prior to the ceremony, which took place on board the _Priscilla_, Mr.
and Mrs. John Alden Smith-Jones, Captain Cecil Burlinghame, several
invited guests from amongst officials and friends in Honolulu, and the
crew of the _Priscilla_ presented gifts to the bride.

Captain Burlinghame in presenting his proffered a few words in
explanation of it.

"To you, Nadara," he said, "these trinkets will hold a deeper meaning
and a greater value than to another, for they come from your own
forgotten island, where they lay for twenty years until, by chance,
I picked them up close by the sea. The poor lady to whom they once
belonged you never knew--it is quite possible that she never was upon
your savage coast--and how her jewels came there must always remain a
mystery. But two things you hold in common with her, for she was a lady
and she was very beautiful."

He held toward Nadara in his open palm a little worn bag of the skins
of small rodents, sewn together with bits of gut. At sight of it both
the girl and Waldo Emerson exclaimed in astonishment.

Nadara took the bag wonderingly in her hands and dumped the contents
into her palm. Waldo pressed forward.

"Did you know to whom those belonged?" he asked Burlinghame.

"To Eugenie Marie Celeste de la Valois, Countess of Crecy," replied the
captain.

"They belonged to Nadara's mother," returned Waldo. "Her foster parents
were present at her birth and took these jewels from the poor woman's
body after she had passed away. She was washed ashore in a boat in
which there was only a dead man beside herself--Nadara was born that
night."

And so, when the clergyman had performed the marriage ceremony he
entered upon the certificate in the space provided there for the name
of the woman: Nadara de la Valois.

And they are living in Boston now in a wonderful home that you have
seen if you ever have been to Boston and been driven about in one of
those great sight-seeing motor busses, for the place is pointed out to
all visitors because of the beauty of its architecture and the fame
that attaches to the historic and aristocratic name of its owner,
which, as it happens, is not Smith-Jones at all.