_ROADSIDE INN_

    _Moor._ Take my horse, and dash a bottle of wine over him. 'Twas hot
    work.

                                              SCHILLER: _The Robbers_.


We will now make inquiries after Mr. Coates and his party, of whom both
we and Dick Turpin have for some time lost sight. With unabated ardor
the vindictive man of law and his myrmidons pressed forward. A tacit
compact seemed to have been entered into between the highwayman and his
pursuers, that he was to fly while they were to follow. Like
bloodhounds, they kept steadily upon his trail; nor were they so far
behind as Dick imagined. At each post-house they passed they obtained
fresh horses, and, while these were saddling, a postboy was despatched
_en courrier_ to order relays at the next station. In this manner they
proceeded after the first stoppage without interruption. Horses were in
waiting for them, as they, "bloody with spurring, fiery hot with haste,"
and their jaded hacks arrived. Turpin had been heard or seen in all
quarters. Turnpike-men, waggoners, carters, trampers, all had seen him.
Besides, strange as it may sound, they placed some faith in his word.
York they believed would be his destination.

At length the coach which Dick had encountered hove in sight. There was
another stoppage and another hubbub. The old gentleman's nightcap was
again manifested, and suffered a sudden occultation, as upon the former
occasion. The postboy, who was in advance, had halted, and given up his
horse to Major Mowbray, who exchanged his seat on the box for one on the
saddle, deeming it more expedient, after his interview with Turpin, to
return to Rookwood, rather than to proceed to town. The postboy was
placed behind Coates, as being the lightest weight; and, thus
reinforced, the party pushed forward as rapidly as heretofore.

Eighty and odd miles had now been traversed--the boundary of another
county, Northampton, passed; yet no rest nor respite had Dick Turpin or
his unflinching mare enjoyed. But here he deemed it fitting to make a
brief halt.

Bordering the beautiful domains of Burleigh House stood a little retired
hostelry of some antiquity, which bore the great Lord Treasurer's arms.
With this house Dick was not altogether unacquainted. The lad who acted
as ostler was known to him. It was now midnight, but a bright and
beaming night. To the door of the stable then did he ride, and knocked
in a peculiar manner. Reconnoitering Dick through a broken pane of glass
in the lintel, and apparently satisfied with his scrutiny, the lad
thrust forth a head of hair as full of straw as Mad Tom's is represented
to be upon the stage. A chuckle of welcome followed his sleepy
salutation. "Glad to see you, Captain Turpin," said he; "can I do
anything for you?"

"Get me a couple of bottles of brandy and a beefsteak," said Dick.

"As to the brandy, you can have that in a jiffy--but the steak, Lord
love you, the old ooman won't stand it at this time; but there's a cold
round, mayhap a slice of that might do--or a knuckle of ham?"

"A pest on your knuckles, Ralph," cried Dick; "have you any raw meat in
the house?"

"Raw meat!" echoed Ralph, in surprise. "Oh, yes, there's a rare rump of
beef. You can have a cut off that, if you like."

"That's the thing I want," said Dick, ungirthing his mare. "Give me the
scraper. There, I can get a whisp of straw from your head. Now run and
get the brandy. Better bring three bottles. Uncork 'em, and let me have
half a pail of water to mix with the spirit."

"A pail full of brandy and water to wash down a raw steak! My eyes!"
exclaimed Ralph, opening wide his sleepy peepers; adding, as he went
about the execution of his task, "I always thought them Rum-padders, as
they call themselves, rum fellows, but now I'm sartin sure on it."

The most sedulous groom could not have bestowed more attention upon the
horse of his heart than Dick Turpin now paid to his mare. He scraped,
chafed, and dried her, sounded each muscle, traced each sinew, pulled
her ears, examined the state of her feet, and, ascertaining that her
"withers were un-wrung," finally washed her from head to foot in the
diluted spirit, not, however, before he had conveyed a thimbleful of the
liquid to his own parched throat, and replenished what Falstaff calls a
"pocket-pistol," which he had about him. While Ralph was engaged in
rubbing her down after her bath, Dick occupied himself, not in dressing
the raw steak in the manner the stable-boy had anticipated, but in
rolling it round the bit of his bridle.

"She will now go as long as there's breath in her body," said he,
putting the flesh-covered iron within her mouth.

The saddle being once more replaced, after champing a moment or two at
the bit, Bess began to snort and paw the earth, as if impatient of
delay; and, acquainted as he was with her indomitable spirit and power,
her condition was a surprise even to Dick himself. Her vigor seemed
inexhaustible, her vivacity was not a whit diminished, but, as she was
led into the open space, her step became as light and free as when she
started on her ride, and her sense of sound as quick as ever. Suddenly
she pricked her ears, and uttered a low neigh. A dull tramp was
audible.

"Ha!" exclaimed Dick, springing into his saddle; "they come."

"Who come, captain?" asked Ralph.

"The road takes a turn here, don't it?" asked Dick--"sweeps round to the
right by the plantations in the hollow?"

"Ay, ay, captain," answered Ralph; "it's plain you knows the ground."

"What lies behind yon shed?"

"A stiff fence, captain--a reg'lar rasper. Beyond that a hill-side steep
as a house, no oss as was ever shoed can go down it."

"Indeed!" laughed Dick.

A loud halloo from Major Mowbray, who seemed advancing upon the wings of
the wind, told Dick that he was discovered. The major was a superb
horseman, and took the lead of his party. Striking his spurs deeply into
his horse, and giving him bridle enough, the major seemed to shoot
forward like a shell through the air. The Burleigh Arms retired some
hundred yards from the road, the space in front being occupied by a neat
garden, with low, clipped edges. No tall timber intervened between Dick
and his pursuers, so that the motions of both parties were visible to
each other. Dick saw in an instant that if he now started he should come
into collision with the major exactly at the angle of the road, and he
was by no means desirous of hazarding such a rencontre. He looked
wistfully back at the double fence.

"Come into the stable. Quick, captain, quick!" exclaimed Ralph.

"The stable!" echoed Dick, hesitating.

"Ay, the stable; it's your only chance. Don't you see he's turning the
corner, and they are all coming? Quick, sir, quick!"

Dick, lowering his head, rode into the tenement, the door of which was
unceremoniously slapped in the major's face, and bolted on the other
side.

"Villain!" cried Major Mowbray, thundering at the door, "come forth! You
are now fairly trapped at last--caught like the woodcock in your own
springe. We have you. Open the door, I say, and save us the trouble of
forcing it. You cannot escape us. We will burn the building down but we
will have you."

"What dun you want, measter?" cried Ralph, from the lintel, whence he
reconnoitered the major, and kept the door fast. "You're clean mista'en.
There be none here."

"We'll soon see that," said Paterson, who had now arrived; and, leaping
from his horse, the chief constable took a short run to give himself
impetus, and with his foot burst open the door. This being accomplished,
in dashed the major and Paterson, but the stable was vacant. A door was
open at the back; they rushed to it. The sharply sloping sides of a hill
slipped abruptly downwards, within a yard of the door. It was a perilous
descent to the horseman, yet the print of a horse's heels were visible
in the dislodged turf and scattered soil.

"Confusion!" cried the major, "he has escaped us."

"He is yonder," said Paterson, pointing out Turpin moving swiftly
through the steaming meadow. "See, he makes again for the road--he
clears the fence. A regular throw he has given us, by the Lord!"

"Nobly done, by Heaven!" cried the major. "With all his faults, I honor
the fellow's courage and admire his prowess. He's already ridden
to-night as I believe never man rode before. I would not have ventured
to slide down that wall, for it's nothing else, with the enemy at my
heels. What say you, gentlemen, have you had enough? Shall we let him
go, or----?"

"As far as chase goes, I don't care if we bring the matter to a
conclusion," said Titus. "I don't think, as it is, that I shall have a
sate to sit on this week to come. I've lost leather most confoundedly."

"What says Mr. Coates?" asked Paterson. "I look to him."

"Then mount, and off," cried Coates. "Public duty requires that we
should take him."

"And private pique," returned the major. "No matter! The end is the
same. Justice shall be satisfied. To your steeds, my merry men all.
Hark, and away."

Once more upon the move, Titus forgot his distress, and addressed
himself to the attorney, by whose side he rode.

"What place is that we're coming to?" asked he, pointing to a cluster of
moonlit spires belonging to a town they were rapidly approaching.

"Stamford," replied Coates.

"Stamford!" exclaimed Titus; "by the powers! then we've ridden a matter
of ninety miles. Why, the great deeds of Redmond O'Hanlon were nothing
to this! I'll remember it to my dying day, and with reason," added he,
uneasily shifting his position on the saddle.