_THE FUNERAL ORATION_

    In northern customs duty was exprest
    To friends departed by their funeral feast;
    Though I've consulted Hollingshed and Stow,
    I find it very difficult to know,
    Who, to refresh the attendants to the grave,
    Burnt claret first, or Naples' biscuit gave.

                                               KING: _Art of Cookery_.

    Ceterum priusquam corpus humo injectâ contegatur, defunctus oratione
    funebri laudabatur.--DURAND.


A supply of spirits was here introduced; lights were brought at the same
time, and placed upon a long oak table. The party gathering round it,
ill-humor was speedily dissipated, and even the storm disregarded, in
the copious libations that ensued. At this juncture, a loiterer appeared
in the hall. His movements were unnoticed by all excepting the sexton,
who watched his proceedings with some curiosity. The person walked to
the window, appearing, so far as could be discovered, to eye the storm
with great impatience. He then paced the hall rapidly backwards and
forwards, and Peter fancied he could detect sounds of disappointment in
his muttered exclamations. Again he returned to the window, as if to
ascertain the probable duration of the shower. It was a hopeless
endeavor; all was pitch-dark without; the lightning was now only seen at
long intervals, but the rain still audibly descended in torrents.
Apparently seeing the impossibility of controlling the elements, the
person approached the table.

"What think you of the night, Mr. Palmer?" asked the sexton of Jack, for
he was the anxious investigator of the weather.

"Don't know--can't say--set in, I think--cursed unlucky--for the
funeral, I mean--we shall be drowned if we go."

"And drunk if we stay," rejoined Peter. "But never fear, it will hold
up, depend upon it, long before we can start. Where have they put the
prisoner?" asked he, with a sudden change of manner.

"I know the room, but can't describe it; it's two or three doors down
the lower corridor of the eastern gallery."

"Good. Who are on guard?"

"Titus Tyrconnel and that swivel-eyed quill-driver, Coates."

"Enough."

"Come, come, Master Peter," roared Toft, "let's have another stave. Give
us one of your odd snatches. No more corpse-candles, or that sort of
thing. Something lively--something jolly--ha, ha!"

"A good move," shouted Jack. "A lively song from _you_--lillibullero
from a death's-head--ha, ha!"

"My songs are all of a sort," returned Peter; "I am seldom asked to
sing a second time. However, you are welcome to the merriest I have."
And preparing himself, like certain other accomplished vocalists, with a
few preliminary hems and haws, he struck forth the following doleful
ditty:

    THE OLD OAK COFFIN

    Sic ego componi versus in ossa velim.--TIBULLUS.

    In a churchyard, upon the sward, a coffin there was laid,
    And leaning stood, beside the wood, a sexton on his spade.
    A coffin old and black it was, and fashioned curiously,
    With quaint device of carved oak, in hideous fantasie.

    For here was wrought the sculptured thought of a tormented face,
    With serpents lithe that round it writhe, in folded strict embrace.
    Grim visages of grinning fiends were at each corner set,
    And emblematic scrolls, mort-heads, and bones together met.

    "Ah, welladay!" that sexton gray unto himself did cry,
    "Beneath that lid much lieth hid--much awful mysterie.
    It is an ancient coffin from the abbey that stood here;
    Perchance it holds an abbot's bones, perchance those of a frere.

    "In digging deep, where monks do sleep, beneath yon cloister shrined,
    That coffin old, within the mould, it was my chance to find;
    The costly carvings of the lid I scraped full carefully,
    In hope to get at name or date, yet nothing could I see.

    "With pick and spade I've plied my trade for sixty years and more,
    Yet never found, beneath the ground, shell strange as that before;
    Full many coffins have I seen--have seen them deep or flat,
    Fantastical in fashion--none fantastical as that."

    And saying so, with heavy blow, the lid he shattered wide,
    And, pale with fright, a ghastly sight that sexton gray espied;
    A miserable sight it was, that loathsome corpse to see,
    The last, last, dreary, darksome stage of fall'n humanity.

    Though all was gone, save reeky bone, a green and grisly heap,
    With scarce a trace of fleshly face, strange posture did it keep.
    The hands were clenched, the teeth were wrenched, as if the wretch
              had risen,
    E'en after death had ta'en his breath, to strive and burst his prison.

    The neck was bent, the nails were rent, no limb or joint was straight;
    Together glued, with blood imbued, black and coagulate.
    And, as the sexton stooped him down to lift the coffin plank,
    His fingers were defiled all o'er with slimy substance dank.

    "Ah, welladay!" that sexton gray unto himself did cry,
    "Full well I see how Fate's decree foredoomed this wretch to die;
    A living man, a breathing man, within the coffin thrust,
    Alack! alack! the agony ere he returned to dust!"

    A vision drear did then appear unto that sexton's eyes;
    Like that poor wight before him straight he in a coffin lies.
    He lieth in a trance within that coffin close and fast;
    Yet though he sleepeth now, he feels he shall awake at last.

    The coffin, then, by reverend men, is borne with footsteps slow,
    Where tapers shine before the shrine, where breathes the requiem low;
    And for the dead the prayer is said, for the soul that is _not_ flown--
    Then all is drowned in hollow sound, the earth is o'er him thrown!

    He draweth breath--he wakes from death to life more horrible;
    To agony! such agony! no living tongue may tell.
    Die! die he must, that wretched one! he struggles--strives in vain;
    No more Heaven's light, nor sunshine bright, shall he behold again.

    "Gramercy, Lord!" the sexton roared, awakening suddenly,
    "If this be dream, yet doth it seem most dreadful so to die.
    Oh, cast my body in the sea! or hurl it on the shore!
    But nail me not in coffin fast--no grave will I dig more."

It was not difficult to discover the effect produced by this song, in
the lengthened faces of the greater part of the audience. Jack Palmer,
however, laughed loud and long.

"Bravo, bravo!" cried he; "that suits my humor exactly. I can't abide
the thoughts of a coffin. No deal box for me."

"A gibbet might, perhaps, serve your turn as well," muttered the sexton;
adding aloud, "I am now entitled to call upon you;--a song!--a song!"

"Ay, a song, Mr. Palmer, a song!" reiterated the hinds. "Yours will be
the right kind of thing."

"Say no more," replied Jack. "I'll give you a chant composed upon Dick
Turpin, the highwayman. It's no great shakes, to be sure, but it's the
best I have." And, with a knowing wink at the sexton, he commenced, in
the true nasal whine, the following strain:

    ONE FOOT IN THE STIRRUP

    OR TURPIN'S FIRST FLING

    Cum esset proposita fuga _Turpi_(n)_s_.--CICERO.

    "One foot in the stirrup, one hand in the rein,
    And the noose be my portion, or freedom I'll gain!
    Oh! give me a seat in my saddle once more,
    And these bloodhounds shall find that the chase is not o'er!"
    Thus muttered Dick Turpin, who found, while he slept,
    That the Philistines old on his slumbers had crept;
    Had entrapped him as puss on her form you'd ensnare,
    And that gone were his snappers--and gone was his mare.
                                                      _Hilloah!_

    How Dick had been captured is readily told,
    The pursuit had been hot, though the night had been cold,
    So at daybreak, exhausted, he sought brief repose
    Mid the thick of a corn-field, away from his foes.
    But in vain was his caution--in vain did his steed,
    Ever watchful and wakeful in moments of need,
    With lip and with hoof on her master's cheek press--
    He slept on, nor heeded the warning of Bess.
                                                      _Hilloah!_

    "Zounds! gem'men!" cried Turpin, "you've found me at fault,
    And the highflying highwayman's come to a halt;
    You have turned up a trump--for I weigh well my weight,--
    And the _forty is yours_, though the halter's _my_ fate.
    Well, come on't what will, you shall own when all's past,
    That Dick Turpin, the Dauntless, was game to the last.
    But, before we go further, I'll hold you a bet,
    That one foot in my stirrup you won't let me set.
                                                      _Hilloah!_

    "A hundred to one is the odds _I_ will stand,
    A hundred to one is the odds _you_ command;
    Here's a handful of goldfinches ready to fly!
    May I venture a foot in my stirrup to try?"
    As he carelessly spoke, Dick directed a glance
    At his courser, and motioned her slyly askance:--
    You might tell by the singular toss of her head,
    And the prick of her ears, that his meaning she read.
                                                      _Hilloah!_

    With derision at first was Dick's wager received,
    And his error at starting as yet unretrieved;
    But when from his pocket the shiners he drew,
    And offered to "make up the hundred to two,"
    There were havers in plenty, and each whispered each,
    The same thing, though varied in figure of speech,
    "Let the fool act his folly--the stirrup of Bess!
    He has put his foot _in it_ already, we guess!"
                                                      _Hilloah!_

    Bess was brought to her master--Dick steadfastly gazed
    At the eye of his mare, then his foot quick upraised;
    His toe touched the stirrup, his hand grasped the rein--
    He was safe on the back of his courser again!
    As the clarion, fray-sounding and shrill, was the neigh
    Of Black Bess, as she answered his cry "Hark-away!"
    "Beset me, ye bloodhounds! in rear and in van;
    My foot's in the stirrup and catch me who can!"
                                                      _Hilloah!_

    There was riding and gibing mid rabble and rout,
    And the old woods re-echoed the Philistines' shout!
    There was hurling and whirling o'er brake and o'er brier,
    But the course of Dick Turpin was swift as Heaven's fire.
    Whipping, spurring, and straining would nothing avail,
    Dick laughed at their curses, and scoffed at their wail;
    "My foot's in the stirrup!"--thus rang his last cry;
    "Bess has answered my call; now her mettle we'll try!"
                                                      _Hilloah!_

Uproarious applause followed Jack's song, when the joviality of the
mourners was interrupted by a summons to attend in the state-room.
Silence was at once completely restored; and, in the best order they
could assume, they followed their leader, Peter Bradley. Jack Palmer
was amongst the last to enter, and remained a not incurious spectator of
a by no means common scene.

Preparations had been made to give due solemnity to the ceremonial. The
leaden coffin was fastened down, and enclosed in an outer case of oak,
upon the lid of which stood a richly-chased massive silver flagon,
filled with burnt claret, called the grace-cup. All the lights were
removed, save two lofty wax flambeaux, which were placed to the back,
and threw a lurid glare upon the group immediately about the body,
consisting of Ranulph Rookwood and some other friends of the deceased.
Dr. Small stood in front of the bier; and, under the directions of Peter
Bradley, the tenantry and household were formed into a wide half-moon
across the chamber. There was a hush of expectation, as Dr. Small looked
gravely round; and even Jack Palmer, who was as little likely as any man
to yield to an impression of the kind, felt himself moved by the scene.

The very orthodox Small, as is well known to our readers, held
everything savoring of the superstitions of the Scarlet Woman in supreme
abomination; and, entertaining such opinions, it can scarcely be
supposed that a funeral oration would find much favor in his eyes,
accompanied, as it was, with the accessories of censer, candle, and cup;
all evidently derived from that period when, under the three-crowned
pontiff's sway, the shaven priest pronounced his benediction o'er the
dead, and released the penitent's soul from purgatorial flames, while he
heavily mulcted the price of his redemption from the possessions of his
successor. Small resented the idea of treading in such steps, as an
insult to himself and his cloth. Was he, the intolerant of Papistry, to
tolerate this? Was he, who could not endure the odor of Catholicism, to
have his nostrils thus polluted--his garments thus defiled by actual
contact with it? It was not to be thought of: and he had formally
signified his declination to Mr. Coates, when a little conversation with
that gentleman, and certain weighty considerations therein held
forth--the advowson of the church of Rookwood residing with the
family--and represented by him, as well as the placing in juxtaposition
of penalties to be incurred by refusal, that the scruples of Small gave
way; and, with the best grace he could muster, very reluctantly promised
compliance.

With these feelings, it will be readily conceived that the doctor was
not in the best possible frame of mind for the delivery of his
exhortation. His spirit had been ruffled by a variety of petty
annoyances, amongst the greatest of which was the condition to which the
good cheer had reduced his clerk, Zachariah Trundletext, whose reeling
eye, pendulous position, and open mouth proclaimed him absolutely
incapable of office. Zachariah was, in consequence, dismissed, and Small
commenced his discourse unsupported. But as our recording it would not
probably conduce to the amusement of our readers, whatever it might to
their edification, we shall pass it over with very brief mention.
Suffice it to say, that the oration was so thickly interstrewn with
lengthy quotations from the fathers,--Chrysostomus, Hieronymus,
Ambrosius, Basilius, Bernardus, and the rest, with whose recondite
Latinity, notwithstanding the clashing of their opinions with his own,
the doctor was intimately acquainted, and which he moreover delighted to
quote,--that his auditors were absolutely mystified and perplexed, and
probably not without design. Countenances of such amazement were turned
towards him, that Small, who had a keen sense of the ludicrous, could
scarcely forbear smiling as he proceeded; and if we could suspect so
grave a personage of waggery, we should almost think that, by way of
retaliation, he had palmed some abstruse, monkish epicedium upon his
astounded auditors.

The oration concluded, biscuits and confectionery were, according to old
observance, handed to such of the tenantry as chose to partake of them.
The serving of the grace-cup, which ought to have formed part of the
duties of Zachariah, had he been capable of office, fell to the share
of the sexton. The bowl was kissed, first by Ranulph, with lips that
trembled with emotion, and afterward by his surrounding friends; but no
drop was tasted--a circumstance which did not escape Peter's
observation. Proceeding to the tenantry, the first in order happened to
be Farmer Toft. Peter presented the cup, and as Toft was about to drain
a deep draught of the wine, Peter whispered in his ear, "Take my advice
for once, Friend Toft, and don't let a bubble of the liquid pass your
lips. For every drop of the wine you drain, Sir Piers will have one sin
the less, and you a load the heavier on your conscience. Didst never
hear of sin-swallowing? For what else was this custom adopted? Seest
thou not the cup's brim hath not yet been moistened? Well, as you
will--ha, ha!" And the sexton passed onwards.

His work being nearly completed, he looked around for Jack Palmer, whom
he had remarked during the oration, but could nowhere discover him.
Peter was about to place the flagon, now almost drained of its contents,
upon its former resting-place, when Small took it from his hands.

"_In poculi fundo residuum non relinque_, admonisheth Pythagoras," said
he, returning the empty cup to the sexton.

"My task here is ended," muttered Peter, "but not elsewhere. Foul
weather or fine, thunder or rain, I must to the church."

Bequeathing his final instructions to certain of the household who were
to form part of the procession, in case it set out, he opened the hall
door, and, the pelting shower dashing heavily in his face, took his way
up the avenue, screaming, as he strode along, the following congenial
rhymes:

    EPHIALTES

    I ride alone--I ride by night
    Through the moonless air on a courser white!
    Over the dreaming earth I fly,
    Here and there--at my fantasy!
    My frame is withered, my visage old,
    My locks are frore, and my bones ice cold.
    The wolf will howl as I pass his lair,
    The ban-dog moan, and the screech-owl stare.
    For breath, at my coming, the sleeper strains,
    And the freezing current forsakes his veins!
    Vainly for pity the wretch may sue--
    Merciless Mara no prayers subdue!
                        _To his couch I flit--
                        On his breast I sit!
                            Astride! astride! astride!
                        And one charm alone
                        --A hollow stone!--[23]
                            Can scare me from his side!_

    A thousand antic shapes I take;
    The stoutest heart at my touch will quake.
    The miser dreams of a bag of gold,
    Or a ponderous chest on his bosom rolled.
    The drunkard groans 'neath a cask of wine;
    The reveller swelts 'neath a weighty chine.
    The recreant turns, by his foes assailed,
    To flee!--but his feet to the ground are nailed.
    The goatherd dreams of his mountain-tops,
    And, dizzily reeling, downward drops.

    The murderer feels at his throat a knife,
    And gasps, as his victim gasped, for life!
    The thief recoils from the scorching brand;
    The mariner drowns in sight of land!
    Thus sinful man have I power to fray,
    Torture, and rack, but not to slay!
    But ever the couch of purity,
    With shuddering glance, I hurry by.
                        _Then mount! away!
                        To horse! I say,
                            To horse! astride! astride!
                        The fire-drake shoots--
                        The screech-owl hoots--
                            As through the air I glide!_


[23] In reference to this imaginary charm, Sir Thomas Browne observes,
in his "Vulgar Errors." "What natural effects can reasonably be
expected, when, to prevent the Ephialtes, or Nightmare, we hang a hollow
stone in our stables?" Grose also states, "that a stone with a hole in
it, hung at the bed's head, will prevent the nightmare, and is therefore
called a hag-stone." The belief in this charm still lingers in some
districts, and maintains, like the horse-shoe affixed to the barn-door,
a feeble stand against the superstition-destroying "march of intellect."