_THE CHURCHYARD_

    Methought I walked, about the mid of night,
    Into a churchyard.

                                           WEBSTER: _The White Devil_.


Lights streamed through the chancel window as the sexton entered the
churchyard, darkly defining all the ramified tracery of the noble Gothic
arch, and illumining the gorgeous dyes of its richly-stained glass,
profusely decorated with the armorial bearings of the founder of the
fane, and the many alliances of his descendants. The sheen of their
blazonry gleamed bright in the darkness, as if to herald to his last
home another of the line whose achievements it displayed. Glowing
colorings, checkered like rainbow tints, were shed upon the broken
leaves of the adjoining yew-trees, and upon the rounded grassy tombs.

Opening the gate, as he looked in that direction, Peter became aware of
a dark figure, enveloped in a large black cloak, and covered with a
slouched hat, standing at some distance, between the window and the
tree, and so intervening as to receive the full influence of the stream
of radiance which served to dilate its almost superhuman stature. The
sexton stopped. The figure remained stationary. There was something
singular both in the costume and situation of the person. Peter's
curiosity was speedily aroused, and, familiar with every inch of the
churchyard, he determined to take the nearest cut, and to ascertain to
whom the mysterious cloak and hat belonged. Making his way over the
undulating graves, and instinctively rounding the headstones that
intercepted his path, he quickly drew near the object of his inquiry.
From the moveless posture it maintained, the figure appeared to be
unconscious of Peter's approach. To his eyes it seemed to expand as he
advanced. He was now almost close upon it, when his progress was
arrested by a violent grasp laid on his shoulder. He started, and
uttered an exclamation of alarm. At this moment a vivid flash of
lightning illumined the whole churchyard, and Peter then thought he
beheld, at some distance from him, two other figures, bearing upon their
shoulders a huge chest, or, it might be, a coffin. The garb of these
figures, so far as it could be discerned through the drenching rain, was
fantastical in the extreme. The foremost seemed to have a long white
beard descending to his girdle. Little leisure, however, was allowed
Peter for observation. The vision no sooner met his glance than it
disappeared, and nothing was seen but the glimmering tombstones--nothing
heard but the whistling wind and the heavily-descending shower. He
rubbed his eyes. The muffled figure had vanished, and not a trace could
be discovered of the mysterious coffin-bearers, if such they were.

"What have I seen?" mentally ejaculated Peter: "is this sorcery or
treachery, or both? No body-snatchers would visit this place on a night
like this, when the whole neighborhood is aroused. Can it be a vision I
have seen? Pshaw! shall I juggle myself as I deceive these hinds? It was
no bearded demon that I beheld, but the gipsy patrico, Balthazar. I knew
him at once. But what meant that muffled figure; and whose arm could it
have been that griped my shoulder? Ha! what if Lady Rookwood should have
given orders for the removal of Susan's body? No, no; that cannot be.
Besides, I have the keys of the vault; and there are hundreds now in the
church who would permit no such desecration. I am perplexed to think
what it can mean. But I will to the vault." Saying which, he hastened to
the church porch, and after wringing the wet from his clothes, as a
water-dog might shake the moisture from his curly hide, and doffing his
broad felt hat, he entered the holy edifice. The interior seemed one
blaze of light to the sexton, in his sudden transition from outer
darkness. Some few persons were assembled, probably such as were engaged
in the preparations; but there was one group which immediately caught
his attention.

Near the communion-table stood three persons, habited in deep mourning,
apparently occupied in examining the various monumental carvings that
enriched the walls. Peter's office led him to that part of the church.
About to descend into the vaults, to make the last preparations for the
reception of the dead, with lantern in hand, keys, and a crowbar, he
approached the party. Little attention was paid to the sexton's
proceedings, till the harsh grating of the lock attracted their notice.

Peter started as he beheld the face of one of the three, and relaxing
his hold upon the key, the strong bolt shot back in the lock. There was
a whisper amongst the party. A light step was heard advancing towards
him; and ere the sexton could sufficiently recover his surprise, or
force open the door, a female figure stood by his side.

The keen, inquiring stare which Peter bestowed upon the countenance of
the young lady so much abashed her, that she hesitated in her purpose of
addressing him, and hastily retired.

"She here!" muttered Peter; "nay, then, I must no longer withhold the
dreaded secret from Luke, or Ranulph may, indeed, wrest his possessions
from him."

Reinforced by her companions, an elderly lady and a tall, handsome man,
whose bearing and deportment bespoke him to be a soldier, the fair
stranger again ventured towards Peter.

"You are the sexton," said she, addressing him in a voice sweet and
musical.

"I am," returned Peter. It was harmony succeeded by dissonance.

"You, perhaps, can tell us, then," said the elderly lady, "whether the
funeral is likely to take place to-night? We thought it possible that
the storm might altogether prevent it."

"The storm is over, as nearly as maybe," replied Peter. "The body will
soon be on its way. I am but now arrived from the hall."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the lady. "None of the family will be present, I
suppose. Who is the chief mourner?"

"Young Sir Ranulph," answered the sexton. "There will be more of the
family than were expected."

"Is Sir Ranulph returned?" asked the young lady, with great agitation of
manner. "I thought he was abroad--that he was not expected. Are you sure
you are rightly informed?"

"I parted with him at the hall not ten minutes since," replied Peter.
"He returned from France to-night most unexpectedly."

"Oh, mother!" exclaimed the younger lady, "that this should be--that I
should meet him here. Why did we come?--let us depart."

"Impossible!" replied her mother; "the storm forbids it. This man's
information is so strange, I scarce can credit it. Are you sure you have
asserted the truth?" said she, addressing Peter.

"I am not accustomed to be doubted," answered he. "Other things as
strange have happened at the hall."

"What mean you?" asked the gentleman, noticing this last remark.

"You would not need to ask the question of me, had you been there,
amongst the other guests," retorted Peter. "Odd things, I tell you, have
been done there this night, and stranger things may occur before the
morning."

"You are insolent, sirrah! I comprehend you not."

"Enough! I can comprehend _you_," replied Peter, significantly; "I know
the count of the mourners invited to this ceremonial, and I am aware
that there are three too many."

"Know you this saucy knave, mother?"

"I cannot call him to mind, though I fancy I have seen him before."

"My recollection serves me better, lady," interposed Peter. "I remember
one who was once the proud heiress of Rookwood--ay, proud and beautiful.
Then the house was filled with her gallant suitors. Swords were crossed
for her. Hearts bled for her. Yet she favored none, until one hapless
hour. Sir Reginald Rookwood _had_ a daughter; Sir Reginald _lost_ a
daughter. Ha!--I see I am right. Well, he is dead and buried; and
Reginald, his son, is dead likewise; and Piers is on his road hither;
and you are the last, as in the course of nature you might have been the
first. And, now that they are all gone, you do rightly to bury your
grievances with them."

"Silence, sirrah!" exclaimed the gentleman, "or I will beat your brains
out with your own spade."

"No; let him speak, Vavasour," said the lady, with an expression of
anguish--"he has awakened thoughts of other days."

"I have done," said Peter, "and must to work. Will you descend with me,
madam, into the sepulchre of your ancestry? All your family lie
within--ay, and the Lady Eleanor, your mother, amongst the number."

Mrs. Mowbray signified her assent, and the party prepared to follow him.

The sexton held the lantern so as to throw its light upon the steps as
they entered the gloomy receptacle of the departed. Eleanor half
repented having ventured within its dreary limits, so much did the
appearance of the yawning catacombs, surcharged with mortality, and,
above all, the ghostly figure of the grim knight, affect her with dread,
as she looked wistfully around. She required all the support her
brother's arm could afford her; nor was Mrs. Mowbray altogether unmoved.

"And all the family are here interred, you say?" inquired the latter.

"All," replied the sexton.

"Where, then, lies Sir Reginald's younger brother?"

"Who?" exclaimed Peter, starting.

"Alan Rookwood."

"What of him?"

"Nothing of moment. But I thought you could, perhaps, inform me. He died
young."

"He did," replied Peter, in an altered tone--"very young; but not before
he had lived to an old age of wretchedness. Do you know his story,
madam?"

"I have heard it."

"From your father's lips?"

"From Sir Reginald Rookwood's--never. Call him not my father, sirrah;
even _here_ I will not have him named so to me."

"Your pardon, madam," returned the sexton. "Great cruelty was shown to
the Lady Eleanor, and may well call forth implacable resentment in her
child; yet methinks the wrong he did his brother Alan was the foulest
stain with which Sir Reginald's black soul was dyed."

"With what particular wrong dost thou charge Sir Reginald?" demanded
Major Mowbray. "What injury did he inflict upon his brother Alan?"

"He wronged his brother's honor," replied the sexton; "he robbed him of
his wife, poisoned his existence, and hurried him to an untimely grave."

Eleanor shudderingly held back during this horrible narration, the
hearing of which she would willingly have shunned, had it been possible.

"Can this be true?" asked the major.

"Too true, my son," replied Mrs. Mowbray, sorrowfully.

"And where lies the unfortunate Alan?" asked Major Mowbray.

"'Twixt two cross roads. Where else should the suicide lie?"

Evading any further question, Peter hastily traversed the vault,
elevating the light so as to reveal the contents of each cell. One
circumstance filled him with surprise and dismay--he could nowhere
perceive the coffin of his daughter. In vain he peered into every
catacomb--they were apparently undisturbed; and, with much internal
marvelling and misgiving, Peter gave up the search. "That vision is now
explained," muttered he; "the body is removed, but by whom? Death! can I
doubt? It must be Lady Rookwood--who else can have any interest in its
removal. She has acted boldly. But she shall yet have reason to repent
her temerity." As he continued his search, his companions silently
followed. Suddenly he stopped, and, signifying that all was finished,
they not unwillingly quitted this abode of horror, leaving him behind
them.

"It is a dreadful place," whispered Eleanor to her mother; "nor would I
have visited it, had I conceived anything of its horrors. And that
strange man! who or what is he?"

"Ay, who is he?" repeated Major Mowbray.

"I recollect him now," replied Mrs. Mowbray; "he is one who has ever
been connected with the family. He had a daughter, whose beauty was her
ruin: it is a sad tale; I cannot tell it now: you have heard enough of
misery and guilt: but that may account for his bitterness of speech. He
was a dependent upon my poor brother."

"Poor man!" replied Eleanor; "if he has been unfortunate, I pity him. I
am sorry we have been into that dreadful place. I am very faint: and I
tremble more than ever at the thought of meeting Ranulph Rookwood again.
I can scarcely support myself--I am sure I shall not venture to look
upon him."

"Had I dreamed of the likelihood of his attending the ceremony, rest
assured, dear Eleanor, we should not have been here: but I was informed
there was no possibility of his return. Compose yourself, my child. It
will be a trying time to both of us; but it is now inevitable."

At this moment the bell began to toll. "The procession has started,"
said Peter, as he passed the Mowbrays. "That bell announces the setting
out."

"See yonder persons hurrying to the door," exclaimed Eleanor, with
eagerness, and trembling violently. "They are coming. Oh! I shall never
be able to go through with it, dear mother."

Peter hastened to the church door, where he stationed himself, in
company with a host of others, equally curious. Flickering lights in the
distance, shining like stars through the trees, showed them that the
procession was collecting in front of the hall. The rain had now
entirely ceased; the thunder muttered from afar, and the lightning
seemed only to lick the moisture from the trees. The bell continued to
toll, and its loud booming awoke the drowsy echoes of the valley. On the
sudden, a solitary, startling concussion of thunder was heard; and
presently a man rushed down from the belfry, with the tidings that he
had seen a ball of fire fall from a cloud right over the hall. Every ear
was on the alert for the next sound; none was heard. It was the crisis
of the storm. Still the funeral procession advanced not. The strong
sheen of the torchlight was still visible from the bottom of the avenue,
now disappearing, now brightly glimmering, as if the bearers were
hurrying to and fro amongst the trees. It was evident that much
confusion prevailed, and that some misadventure had occurred. Each man
muttered to his neighbor, and few were there who had not in a measure
surmised the cause of the delay. At this juncture, a person without his
hat, breathless with haste and almost palsied with fright, rushed
through the midst of them and, stumbling over the threshold, fell
headlong into the church.

"What's the matter, Master Plant? What has happened? Tell us! Tell us!"
exclaimed several voices simultaneously.

"Lord have mercy upon us!" cried Plant, gasping for utterance, and not
attempting to raise himself. "It's horrible! dreadful! oh!--oh!"

"What has happened?" inquired Peter, approaching the fallen man.

"And dost _thou_ need to ask, Peter Bradley? thou, who foretold it all?
but I will not say what I think, though my tongue itches to tell thee
the truth. Be satisfied, thy wizard's lore has served thee right--he is
dead."

"Who? Ranulph Rookwood? Has anything befallen him, or the prisoner, Luke
Bradley?" asked the sexton, with eagerness.

A scream here burst forth from one who was standing behind the group;
and, in spite of the efforts of her mother to withhold her, Eleanor
Mowbray rushed forward.

"Has aught happened to Sir Ranulph?" asked she.

"Noa--noa--not to Sir Ranulph--he be with the body."

"Heaven be thanked for that!" exclaimed Eleanor. And then, as if ashamed
of her own vehemence, and, it might seem, apparent indifference to
another's fate, she inquired who was hurt.

"It be poor neighbor Toft, that be killed by a thunderbolt, ma'am,"
replied Plant.

Exclamations of horror burst from all around.

No one was more surprised at this intelligence than the sexton. Like
many other seers, he had not, in all probability, calculated upon the
fulfilment of his predictions, and he now stared aghast at the extent of
his own foreknowledge.

"I tell 'ee what, Master Peter," said Plant, shaking his bullet-head,
"it be well for thee thou didn't live in my grandfather's time, or
thou'dst ha' been ducked in a blanket; or may be burnt at the stake,
like Ridley and Latimer, as we read on--but however that may be, ye
shall hear how poor Toft's death came to pass, and nobody can tell 'ee
better nor I, seeing I were near to him, poor fellow, at the time. Well,
we thought as how the storm were all over--and had all got into order of
march, and were just beginning to step up the avenue, the coffin-bearers
pushing lustily along, and the torches shining grandly, when poor Simon
Toft, who could never travel well in liquor in his life, reeled to one
side, and staggering against the first huge lime-tree, sat himself down
beneath it--thou knowest the tree I mean."

"The tree of fate," returned Peter. "I ought, methinks, to know it."

"Well, I were just stepping aside to pick him up, when all at once there
comes such a crack of thunder, and, whizzing through the trees, flashed
a great globe of red fire, so bright and dazzlin', it nearly blinded me;
and when I opened my eyes, winkin' and waterin', I see'd that which
blinded me more even than the flash--that which had just afore been poor
Simon, but which was now a mass o' black smouldering ashes, clean
consumed and destroyed--his clothes rent to a thousand tatters--the
earth and stones tossed up, and scattered all about, and a great
splinter of the tree lying beside him."

"Heaven's will be done!" said the sexton; "this is an awful judgment."

"And Sathan cast down; for this is a spice o' his handiwork," muttered
Plant; adding, as he slunk away, "If ever Peter Bradley do come to the
blanket, dang me if I don't lend a helpin' hand."