_MAJOR MOWBRAY_

    _Mephistopheles._ Out with your toasting iron! Thrust away!

                                     HAYWARD'S _Translation of Faust_.


Conkey Jem went in search of such provisions as his hovel afforded.
Turpin, meantime, lent his assistance towards the revival of Alan
Rookwood; and it was not long before his efforts, united with those of
Luke, were successful, and Alan restored to consciousness. He was
greatly surprised to find the highwayman had joined them, and expressed
an earnest desire to quit the hut as speedily as possible.

"That shall be done forthwith, my dear fellow," said Dick. "But if you
had fasted as long as I have done, and gone through a few of my fatigues
into the bargain, you would perceive, without difficulty, the propriety
of supping before you started. Here comes Old Nosey, with a flitch of
bacon and a loaf. Egad, I can scarce wait for the toasting. In my
present mood, I could almost devour a grunter in the sty." Whereupon he
applied himself to the loaf, and to a bottle of stout March ale, which
Jem placed upon the table, quaffing copious draughts of the latter,
while the ferryman employed himself in toasting certain rashers of the
flitch upon the hissing embers.

Luke, meanwhile, stalked impatiently about the room. He had laid aside
his tridental spear, having first, however, placed a pistol within his
breast to be ready for instant service, should occasion demand it, as he
could now put little reliance upon the ferryman's fidelity. He glanced
with impatience at Turpin, who pursued his meal with steady voracity,
worthy of a half-famished soldier; but the highwayman returned no answer
to his looks, except such as was conveyed by the incessant clatter of
his masticating jaws, during the progress of his, apparently,
interminable repast.

"Ready for you in a second, Sir Luke," said Dick; "all right
now--capital ale, Charon--strong as Styx--ha, ha!--one other rasher, and
I've done. Sorry to keep you--can't conceive how cleverly I put the
winkers upon 'em at York, in the dress of a countryman; all owing to old
Balty, the patrico, an old pal--ha, ha! My old pals never _nose_ upon
me--eh, Nosey--always help one out of the water--always staunch. Here's
health to you, old crony."

Jem returned a sulky response, as he placed the last rasher on the
table, which was speedily discussed.

"Poor Bess!" muttered Dick, as he quaffed off the final glass of ale.
"Poor lass! we buried her by the roadside, beneath the trees--deep--deep.
Her remains shall never be disturbed. Alas! alas! my bonny Black Bess!
But no matter, her name is yet alive--her deeds will survive her--the
trial is over. And now," continued he, rising from his seat, "I'm with
you. Where are the tits?"

"In the stable, under ground," growled Jem.

Alan Rookwood, in the mean time, had joined his grandson, and they
conversed an instant or two apart.

"My strength will not bear me through the night," said he. "That fellow
has thoroughly disabled me. You must go without me to the hall. Here is
the key of the secret passage. You know the entrance. I will await you
in the tomb."

"The tomb!" echoed Luke.

"Ay, our family vault," returned Alan, with a ghastly grin--"it is the
only place of security for me now. Let me see _her_ there. Let me know
that my vengeance is complete, that I triumph in my death over him, the
accursed _brother_, through you, my grandson. _You_ have a rival
brother--a successful one; you know now what hatred is."

"I do," returned Luke, fiercely.

"But not such hate as mine, which, through a life, a long life, hath
endured, intense as when 'twas first engendered in my bosom; which _from
one_ hath spread o'er all my race--o'er all save _you_--and which even
now, when death stares me in the face--when the spirit pants to fly from
its prison-house, burns fiercely as ever. You cannot know what hate like
that may be. You must have wrongs--such wrongs as _mine_ first."

"My hate to Ranulph is bitter as your own to Sir Reginald."

"Name him not," shrieked Alan. "But, oh! to think upon the bride he
robbed me of--the young--the beautiful!--whom I loved to madness; whose
memory is a barbed shaft, yet rankling keen as ever at my heart. God of
Justice! how is it that I have thus long survived? But some men die by
inches. My dying lips shall name him once again, and then 'twill be but
to blend his name with curses."

"I speak of him no more," said Luke. "I will meet you in the vault."

"Remember, to-morrow is her wedding day with Ranulph."

"Think you I forget it?"

"Bear it constantly in mind. To-morrow's dawn must see her _yours_ or
_his_. You have her oath. To you or to death she is affianced. If she
should hesitate in her election, do not you hesitate. Woman's will is
fickle; her scruples of conscience will be readily overcome; she will
not heed her vows--but let her not escape you. Cast off all your
weakness. You are young, and not as I am, age-enfeebled. Be firm, and,"
added he, with a look of terrible meaning, "if all else should fail--if
you are surrounded--if you cannot bear her off--use this," and he placed
a dagger in Luke's hands. "It has avenged me, ere now, on a perjured
wife, it will avenge you of a forsworn mistress, and remove all obstacle
to Rookwood."

Luke took the weapon.

"Would you have me kill her?" demanded he.

"Sooner than she should be Ranulph's."

"Ay, aught sooner than that. But I would not murder both."

"Both!" echoed Alan. "I understand you not."

"Sybil and Eleanor," replied Luke; "for, as surely as I live, Sybil's
death will lie at my door."

"How so?" asked Alan; "the poison was self-ministered."

"True," replied Luke, with terrible emphasis, "but I _spoke daggers_.
Hearken to me," said he, hollowly whispering in his grandsire's ears.
"Methinks I am not long for this world. I have seen her since her
death!"

"Tut, tut," replied Alan. "'Tis not for you--a man--to talk thus. A
truce to these womanish fancies."

"Womanish or not," returned Luke; "either my fancy has deceived me, or I
beheld her, distinctly as I now behold you, within yon cave, while you
were sleeping by my side."

"It is disordered fancy," said Alan Rookwood. "You will live--live to
inherit Rookwood--live to see them fall crushed beneath your feet. For
myself, if I but see you master of Eleanor's hand, or know that she no
longer lives to bless your rival, or to mar your prospects, I care not
how soon I brave my threatened doom."

"Of one or other you shall be resolved to-night," said Luke, placing the
dagger within his vest.

At this moment a trampling of a horse was heard before the hovel, and in
another instant a loud knocking resounded from the door. The ferryman
instantly extinguished the light, motioning his companions to remain
silent.

"What, ho!" shouted a voice. "Ferry wanted."

"Gad zooks!" exclaimed Dick. "As I live, 'tis Major Mowbray!"

"Major Mowbray!" echoed Alan, in amazement "What doth he here?"

"He must be on his way from York to Rookwood, I conclude," said Dick.
"If he's here, I'll engage the others are not far off."

Scarcely were the words out of Dick's mouth, when further clatter was
heard at the door, and the tones of Coates were heard, in _altissimo_
key, demanding admittance.

"Let us retire into the next room," whispered Turpin, "and then admit
them by all means, Conkey. And, hark ye, manage to detain them a few
seconds."

"I'll do it," said Jem. "There's a bit of a hole you can peep through."

Another loud rat-tat was heard at the door, threatening to burst it from
its hinges.

"Well, I be coming," said Jem, seeing the coast was clear, in a drowsy,
yawning tone, as if just awakened from sleep. "You'll cross the river
none the faster for making so much noise."

With these words he unbarred the door, and Coates and Paterson, who, it
appeared, were proceeding to Rookwood, entered the hovel. Major Mowbray
remained on horseback at the door.

"Can you find us a glass of brandy to keep out the fog?" said Coates,
who knew something of our ferryman's vocations. "I know you are a lad of
amazing _spirit_."

"May be I can, master, if I choose. But won't the other gemman walk
in-doors likewise?"

"No, no," said Coates; "Major Mowbray don't choose to dismount."

"Well, as you please," said Jem. "It'll take me a minute or two to get
the punt in order for all them prads."

"The brandy in the first place," said Coates. "What's here?" added the
loquacious attorney, noticing the remnants of Turpin's repast. "But that
we're hurried, I should like a little frizzled bacon myself."

Jem opened the door of his dormitory with the greatest caution, though
apparent indifference, and almost instantly returned with the brandy.
Coates filled a glass for Paterson, and then another for himself. The
ferryman left the house apparently to prepare his boat, half closing the
door after him.

"By my faith! this is the right thing, Paterson," said the attorney. "We
may be sure the strength of this was never tested by a gauger's proof.
Take another thimbleful. We've twelve miles and a heavy pull to go
through ere we reach Rookwood. After all, we made but a poor night's
work of it, Master Constable. Cursed stupid in us to let him escape. I
only wish we had such another chance. Ah, if we had him within reach
now, how we would spring upon him--secure him in an instant. I should
glory in the encounter. I tell you what, Paterson, if ever he is taken,
I shall make a point of attending his execution, and see whether he dies
game. Ha, ha! You think he's sure to swing, Paterson, eh?"

"Why, yes," replied the chief constable. "I wish I was as certain of my
reward as that Turpin will eventually figure at the scragging-post."

"Your reward!" replied Coates. "Make yourself easy on that score, my
boy; you shall have your dues, depend upon it. Nay, for the matter of
that, I'll give you the money now, if you think proper."

"Nothing like time present," said Paterson. "We'll make all square at
once."

"Well, then," said Coates, taking out a pocket-book, "you shall have the
hundred I promised. You won't get Turpin's reward, the three hundred
pounds; but that can't be helped. You shall have mine--always a man of
my word, Paterson," continued the attorney, counting out the money. "My
father, the thief-taker, was a man of his word before me."

"No doubt," said the chief constable; "I shall always be happy to serve
you."

"And then there's that other affair," said the attorney, mysteriously,
still occupied in doling out his bank-notes, "that Luke Bradley's case;
the fellow, I mean, who calls himself Sir Luke Rookwood--ha, ha! A rank
impostor! Two fives, that makes fifty: you want another fifty, Paterson.
As I was saying, we may make a good job of that--we must ferret him out.
I know who will come down properly for that; and if we could only tuck
him up with his brother blade, why it would be worth double. He's all
along been a thorn in my Lady Rookwood's side; he's an artful
scoundrel."

"Leave him to me," said Paterson; "I'll have him in less than a week.
What's your charge against him?"

"Felony, burglary, murder, every description of crime under the
heavens," said Coates. "He's a very devil incarnate. Dick Turpin is as
mild as milk compared with him. By-the-by, now I think of it, this Jem,
Conkey Jem, as folks call him, may know something about him; he's a keen
file; I'll sound him. Thirty, forty, fifty--there's the exact amount. So
much for Dick Turpin."

"Dick Turpin thanks you for it in person," said Dick, suddenly snatching
the whole sum from Paterson's hands, and felling the chief constable
with a blow of one of his pistols. "I wish I was as sure of escaping the
gallows as I am certain that Paterson has got his reward. You stare,
sir. You are once more in the hands of the Philistines. See who is at
your elbow."

Coates, who was terrified almost out of his senses at the sight of
Turpin, scarcely ventured to turn his head; but when he did so, he was
perfectly horror-stricken at the threatening aspect of Luke, who held a
cutlass in his hand, which he had picked up in the ferryman's bedroom.

"So you would condemn me for crimes I have never committed," said Luke.
"I am tempted, I own, to add the destruction of your worthless existence
to their number."

"Mercy, for God's sake, mercy!" cried Coates, throwing himself at Luke's
feet. "I meant not what I said."

"Hence, reptile," said Luke, pushing him aside; "I leave you to be dealt
upon by others."

At this juncture, the door of the hut was flung open, and in rushed
Major Mowbray, sword in hand, followed by Conkey Jem.

"There he stands, sir," cried the latter; "upon him!"

"What! Conkey Jem turned snitch upon his pals?" cried Dick; "I scarce
believe my own ears."

"Make yourself scarce, Dick," growled Jem; "the jigger's open, and the
boat loose. Leave Luke to his fate. He's sold."

"Never! vile traitor," shouted Dick; "'tis thou art _sold_, not he;"
and, almost ere the words were spoken, a ball was lodged in the brain of
the treacherous ferryman.

Major Mowbray, meanwhile, had rushed furiously upon Luke, who met his
assault with determined calmness. The strife was sharp, and threatened a
speedy and fatal issue. On the Major's side it was a desperate attack of
cut and thrust, which Luke had some difficulty in parrying; but as yet
no wounds were inflicted. Soldier as was the Major, Luke was not a whit
inferior to him in his knowledge of the science of defence, and in the
exercise of the broadsword he was perhaps the more skilful of the two:
upon the present occasion his coolness stood him in admirable stead.
Seeing him hard pressed, Turpin would have come to his assistance; but
Luke shouted to him to stand aside, and all that Dick could do, amid the
terrific clash of steel, was to kick the tables out of the way of the
combatants. Luke's aim was now slightly grazed by a cut made by the
Major, which he had parried. The smart of the wound roused his ire. He
attacked his adversary in his turn, with so much vigor and good will,
that, driven backwards by the irresistible assault, Major Mowbray
stumbled over the ferryman's body, which happened to lie in his way; and
his sword being struck from his grasp, his life became at once at his
assailant's disposal.

Luke sheathed his sword. "Major Mowbray," said he, sternly, "your life
is in my power. I spare it for the blood that is between us--for your
sister's sake. I would not raise my hand against her brother."

"I disclaim your kindred with me, villain!" wrathfully exclaimed the
Major. "I hold you no otherwise than as a wretched impostor, who has set
up claims he cannot justify; and as to my sister, if you dare to couple
her name----" and the Major made an ineffectual attempt to raise
himself, and to regain his sword, which Turpin, however, removed.

"Dare!" echoed Luke, scornfully; "hereafter, you may learn to fear my
threats, and acknowledge the extent of my daring; and in that confidence
I give you life. Listen to me, sir. I am bound for Rookwood. I have
private access to the house--to your sister's chamber--_her
chamber_--mark you that! I shall go armed--attended. This night she
shall be mine. From you--from Ranulph--from Lady Rookwood, from all will
I bear her off. She shall be mine, and you, before the dawn, my brother,
or----" And Luke paused.

"What further villainy remains untold?" inquired the Major, fiercely.

"You shall bewail your sister's memory," replied Luke, gloomily.

"I embrace the latter alternative with rapture," replied the Major--"God
grant her firmness to resist you. But I tremble for her." And the stern
soldier groaned aloud in his agony.

"Here is a cord to bind him," said Turpin; "he must remain a prisoner
here."

"Right," said Alan Rookwood, "unless--but enough blood has been shed
already."

"Ay, marry has there," said Dick, "and I had rather not have given
Conkey Jem a taste of blue plumb, had there been any other mode of
silencing the snitching scoundrel, which there was not. As to the Major,
he's a gallant enemy, and shall have fair play as long as Dick Turpin
stands by. Come, sir," added he, to the Major, as he bound him hand and
foot with the rope, "I'll do it as gently as I can. You had better
submit with a good grace. There's no help for it. And now for my friend
Paterson, who was so anxious to furnish me with a hempen cravat, before
my neck was in order, he shall have an extra twist of the rope himself,
to teach him the inconvenience of a tight neckcloth when he recovers."
Saying which, he bound Paterson in such a manner, that any attempt at
liberation on the chief constable's part would infallibly strangle him.
"As to you, Mr. Coates," said he, addressing the trembling man of law,
"you shall proceed to Rookwood with us. You may yet be useful, and I'll
accommodate you with a seat behind my own saddle--a distinction I never
yet conferred upon any of your tribe. Recollect the countryman at the
Bowling-green at York--ha, ha! Come along, sir." And having kicked out
the turf fire, Dick prepared to depart.

It would be vain to describe the feelings of rage and despair which
agitated the major's bosom, as he saw the party quit the hovel,
accompanied by Coates. Aware as he was of their destination, after one
or two desperate but ineffectual attempts to liberate himself, by which
he only increased the painful constriction of his bonds, without in the
slightest degree ameliorating his condition, he resigned himself, with
bitterest forebodings, to his fate. There was no one even to sympathize
with his sufferings. Beside him lay the gory corpse of the ferryman,
and, at a little distance, the scarcely more animate frame of the chief
constable. And here we must leave him, to follow, for a short space, the
course of Luke and his companions.

Concerning themselves little about their own steeds, the party took
those which first offered, and embarking man and horse in the boat, soon
pushed across the waters of the lutulent Don. Arrived at the opposite
banks of the river, they mounted, and, guided by Luke, after half an
hour's sharp riding, arrived at the skirts of Rookwood Park. Entering
this beautiful sylvan domain, they rode for some time silently among the
trees, till they reached the knoll whence Luke beheld the hall on the
eventful night of his discovery of his mother's wedding ring. A few days
only had elapsed, but during that brief space what storms had swept over
his bosom--what ravages had they not made! He was then all ardor--all
impetuosity--all independence. The future presented a bright unclouded
prospect. Wealth, honors, and happiness apparently awaited him. It was
still the same exquisite scene, hushed, holy, tranquil--even solemn, as
upon that glorious night. The moon was out, silvering wood and water,
and shining on the white walls of the tranquil mansion. Nature was calm,
serene, peaceful as ever. Beneath the trees, he saw the bounding
deer--upon the water, the misty wreaths of vapor--all, all was dreamy,
delightful, soothing, all save his heart--_there_ was the
conflict--_there_ the change. Was it a troubled dream, with the dark
oppression of which he was struggling, or was it stern, waking, actual
life? That moment's review of his wild career was terrible. He saw to
what extremes his ungovernable passions had hurried him; he saw their
inevitable consequences; he saw also his own fate; but he rushed madly
on.

He swept round the park, keeping under the covert of the wood, till he
arrived at the avenue leading to the mansion. The stems of the aged
limes gleamed silvery white in the moonshine. Luke drew in the rein
beneath one of the largest of the trees.

"A branch has fallen," said he, as his grandsire joined him.

"Ha!" exclaimed Alan, "a branch from that tree?"

"It bodes ill to Ranulph," whispered Luke, "does it not?"

"Perchance," muttered Alan. "'Tis a vast bough!"

"We meet within an hour," said Luke, abruptly.

"Within the tomb of our ancestry," replied Alan; "I will await you
there."

And as he rode away, Alan murmured to himself the following verse from
one of his own ballads:

    But whether gale or calm prevail, or threatening cloud hath fled,
    By hand of Fate, predestinate, a limb that tree will shed--
    A verdant bough, untouched, I trow, by axe or tempest's breath--
    To Rookwood's head an omen dread of fast approaching death.