_DICK TURPIN_

    Many a fine fellow with a genius extensive enough to have effected
    universal reformation has been doomed to perish by the halter. But
    does not such a man's renown extend through centuries and tens of
    centuries, while many a prince would be overlooked in history were
    it not the historian's interest to increase the number of his pages?
    Nay, when the traveller sees a gibbet, does he not exclaim, "That
    fellow was no fool!" and lament the hardship of the
    times?--SCHILLER: _The Robbers_.


Turpin's quick eye ranged over the spreading sward in front of the
ancient priory, and his brow became contracted. The feeling, however,
was transient. The next instant saw him the same easy, reckless being he
had been before. There was a little more paleness in his cheek than
usual; but his look was keener, and his knees involuntarily clasped the
saddle more firmly. No other symptom of anxiety was perceptible. It
would be no impeachment to Dick's valor were it necessary to admit that
a slight tremor crossed him as he scanned the formidable array of his
opponents. The admission is needless. Dick himself would have been the
last man to own it; nor shall we do the memory of our undaunted
highwayman any such injustice. Turpin was intrepid to a fault. He was
rash; apt to run into risks for the mere pleasure of getting out of
them: danger was his delight, and the degree of excitement was always in
proportion to the peril incurred. After the first glance, he became, to
use his own expressive phrase, "as cool as a cucumber;" and continued,
as long as they permitted him, like a skilful commander, calmly to
calculate the numerical strength of his adversaries, and to arrange his
own plan of resistance.

This troop of horsemen, for such it was, might probably amount in the
aggregate to twenty men, and presented an appearance like that of a
strong muster at a rustic fox-chase, due allowance being made for the
various weapons of offence; to-wit: naked sabers, firelocks, and a world
of huge horse-pistols, which the present _field_ carried along with
them. This resemblance was heightened by the presence of an old huntsman
and a gamekeeper or two, in scarlet and green jackets, and a few yelping
hounds that had followed after them. The majority of the crew consisted
of sturdy yeomen; some of whom, mounted upon wild, unbroken colts, had
pretty lives of it to maintain their seats, and curvetted about in "most
admired disorder;" others were seated upon more docile, but quite as
provoking specimens of the cart-horse breed, whose sluggish sides,
reckless alike of hobnailed heel or ash sapling, refused to obey their
riders' intimations to move; while others again, brought stiff,
wrong-headed ponies to the charge--obstinate, impracticable little
brutes, who seemed to prefer revolving on their own axis, and describing
absurd rotatory motions, to proceeding in the direct and proper course
pointed out to them. Dick could scarcely forbear laughing at these
ridiculous man[oe]uvres; but his attention was chiefly attracted towards
three individuals, who were evidently the leaders of this warlike
expedition. In the thin, tall figure of the first of these he recognized
Ranulph Rookwood. With the features and person of the second of the
group he was not entirely unacquainted, and fancied--nor incorrectly
fancied--that his military bearing, or, as he would have expressed it,
"the soldier-like cut of his jib," could belong to no other than Major
Mowbray, whom he had once eased of a purse on Finchley Common. In the
round, rosy countenance and robustious person of the last of the trio he
discovered his ancient ally, Titus Tyrconnel.

"Ah, Titus, my jewel, are you there?" exclaimed Dick, as he
distinguished the Irishman. "Come, I have _one_ friend among them whom I
may welcome. So, they see me now. Off they come, pell-mell. Back, Bess,
back!--slowly, wench, slowly--there--stand!" And Bess again remained
motionless.

The report of Turpin's pistol reached the ears of the troop; and as all
were upon the alert, he had scarcely presented himself at the gateway,
when a loud shout was raised, and the whole cavalcade galloped towards
him, creating, as may be imagined, the wildest disorder; each horseman
yelling, as he neared the arch, and got involved in the press occasioned
by the unexpected concentration of forces at that point, while oaths and
blows, kicks and cuffs, were reciprocated with such hearty good-will,
that, had Turpin ever read Ariosto or Cervantes, or heard of the discord
of King Agramante's camp, this _mêlée_ must have struck him as its
realization. As it was, entertaining little apprehension of the result,
he shouted encouragement to them. Scarcely, however, had the foremost
horseman disentangled himself from the crowd, and, struggling to the
door, was in the act of levelling his pistol at Turpin's head, when a
well-directed ball pierced the brain of his charger, and horse and man
rolled to the ground. Vowing vengeance, a second succeeded, and was in
like manner compelled to bite the dust.

"That will let Old Peter know that Ranulph Rookwood is at hand,"
exclaimed Dick. "I shan't throw away another shot."

The scene at the archway was now one of complete confusion. Terrified by
the shots, some of the boors would have drawn back, while others, in
mid career, advanced, and propelled them forwards. It was like the
meeting of two tides. Here and there, regardless of the bit, and scared
by the firing, a wild colt broke all bounds, and, hurling his rider in
the air, darted off into the green; or, in another case, rushed forward,
and encountering the prostrate cattle cumbering the entrance to the
priory hall, stumbled, and precipitated his master neck-over-heels at
the very feet of his enemy. During all this tumult, a few shots were
fired at the highwayman, which, without doing him a jot of mischief,
tended materially to increase their own confusion.

The voice of Turpin was now heard above the din and turmoil to sound a
parley; and as he appeared disposed to offer no opposition, some of his
antagonists ventured to raise themselves from the ground, and to
approach him.

"I demand to be led to Sir Ranulph Rookwood," said Turpin.

"He is here," said Ranulph, riding up. "Villain, you are my prisoner."

"As you list, Sir Ranulph," returned Dick, coolly; "but let me have a
word in private with you ere you do aught you may repent hereafter."

"No words, sir--deliver up your arms, or----"

"My pistols are at your service," replied Dick. "I have just discharged
them."

"You may have others. We must search you."

"Hold!" cried Dick; "if you will not listen to me, read that paper." And
he handed Ranulph his mother's letter to Mr. Coates. It was without the
superscription, which he had thrown aside.

"My mother's hand!" exclaimed Ranulph, reddening with anger, as he
hastily perused its contents. "And she sent this to you? You lie,
villain--'tis a forgery."

"Let this speak for me," returned Dick, holding out the finger upon
which Lady Rookwood's ring was placed. "Know you that cipher?"

"You have stolen it," retorted Ranulph. "My mother," added he, in a
deep, stern whisper, articulated only for Turpin's hearing, "would never
have entrusted her honor to a highwayman's keeping."

"She has entrusted more--her life," replied Dick, in a careless tone.
"She would have bribed me to do murder."

"Murder!" echoed Ranulph, aghast.

"Ay, to murder your brother," returned Dick; "but let that pass. You
have read that note. I have acted solely upon your mother's
responsibility. Lady Rookwood's _honor_ is pledged for my safety. Of
course her son will set me free."

"Never!"

"Well, as you please. Your mother is in my power. Betray me, and you
betray her."

"No more!" returned Ranulph, sternly. "Go your ways. You are free."

"Pledge me your word of honor I am safe." Ranulph had scarcely given his
pledge, when Major Mowbray rode furiously up. A deep flush of anger
burnt upon his cheeks; his sword was drawn in his hand. He glanced at
Turpin, as if he would have felled him from his saddle.

"This is the ruffian," cried the major, fiercely, "by whom I was
attacked some months ago, and for whose apprehension the reward of three
hundred pounds is offered by his majesty's proclamation, with a free
pardon to his accomplices. This is Richard Turpin. He has just added
another crime to his many offences. He has robbed my mother and sister.
The postboy knew him the moment he came up. Where are they, villain?
Whither are they gone?--answer!"

"I know not," replied Turpin, calmly. "Did not the lad tell you they
were rescued?"

"Rescued!--by whom?" asked Ranulph, with great emotion.

"By one who calls himself Sir Luke Rookwood," answered Turpin, with a
meaning smile.

"By him!" ejaculated Ranulph. "Where are they now?"

"I have already answered that question," said Dick. "I repeat, I know
not."

"You are my prisoner," cried the major, seizing Turpin's bridle.

"I have Sir Ranulph's word for my safety," rejoined Turpin. "Let go my
rein."

"How is this?" asked Major Mowbray, incredulously.

"Ask me not. Release him," replied Ranulph.

"Ranulph," said the major, "you ask an impossibility. My honor--my
duty--is implicated in this man's capture."

"The honor of all of us is involved in his deliverance," returned
Ranulph, in a whisper. "Let him go. I will explain all hereafter. Let us
search for them--for Eleanor. Surely, after this, you will help us to
find them," added he, addressing Turpin.

"I wish, with all my soul, I could do so," replied the highwayman.

"I see'd the ladies cross the brook, and enter these old ruins,"
interposed the postboy, who had now joined the party. "I see'd 'em from
where I stood on the hill-side; and as I kept a pretty sharp look-out,
and have a tolerably bright eye of my own, I don't think as how they
ever comed out again."

"Some one is hidden within yon fissure in the wall," exclaimed Ranulph;
"I see a figure move."

And he flung himself from his horse, rushing towards the mouth of the
cell. Imitating his example, Major Mowbray followed his friend, sword in
hand.

"The game begins now in right earnest," said Dick to himself; "the old
fox will be soon unearthed. I must look to my snappers." And he thrust
his hand quietly into his pocket in search of a pistol.

Just as Ranulph and the major reached the recess they were startled by
the sudden apparition of the ill-fated attorney.

"Mr. Coates!" exclaimed Ranulph, in surprise. "What do you here, sir?"

"I--I--that is--Sir Ranulph--you must excuse me, sir--particular
business--can't say," returned the trembling attorney; for at this
instant his eye caught that of Turpin, and the ominous reflexion of a
polished-steel barrel, held carelessly towards him. He was aware, also,
that on the other hand he was, in like manner, the mark of Rust and
Wilder; those polite gentlemen having threatened him with a brace of
slugs in his brain if he dared to betray their hiding-place. "It is
necessary that I should be _guarded_ in my answers," murmured he.

"Is there any one within that place besides yourself?" said the major,
making a movement thither.

"No, sir, nobody at all," answered Coates, hastily, fancying at the same
time that he heard the click of the pistol that was to be his
death-warrant.

"How came you here, sir?" demanded Ranulph.

"Do you mean in this identical spot?" replied Coates, evasively.

"You can have no difficulty in answering that question," said the major,
sternly.

"Pardon me, sir. I find considerable difficulty in answering any
question, situated as I am."

"Have you seen Miss Mowbray?" asked Ranulph, eagerly.

"Or my mother?" said the major, in the same breath.

"Neither," replied Coates, rather relieved by these questions.

"I suspect you are deceiving us, sir," said the major. "Your manner is
confused. I am convinced you know more of this matter than you choose to
explain; and if you do not satisfy me at once, fully and explicitly, I
vow to Heaven----" and the major's sword described a glittering circle
round his head.

"Are you privy to their concealment?" asked Ranulph. "Have you seen
aught of them, or of Luke Bradley?"

"Speak, or this moment is your last," said the major.

"If it _is_ my last, I _cannot_ speak," returned Coates. "I can make
neither head nor tail of your questions, gentlemen."

"And you positively assure me you have not seen Mrs. Mowbray and her
daughter?" said Ranulph.

Turpin here winked at Coates. The attorney understood him.

"I don't positively assert that," faltered he.

"How!--you _have_ seen them?" shouted Ranulph.

"Where are they?--in safety--speak!" added the major.

Another expressive gesture from the highwayman communicated to the
attorney the nature of his reply.

"Without, sir--without--yonder," he replied. "I will show you myself.
Follow, gentlemen, follow." And away scampered Coates, without once
venturing to look behind him.

In an instant the ruined hall was deserted, and Turpin alone left
behind. In the excitement of the moment his presence had been forgotten.
In an instant afterwards the _arena_ was again occupied by a company
equally numerous. Rust and Wilder issued from their hiding-places,
followed by a throng of the gipsy crew.

"Where is Sir Luke Rookwood?" asked Turpin.

"He remains below," was the answer returned.

"And Peter Bradley?"

"Stays there likewise."

"No matter. Now make ready, pals. Give 'em one shout--Hurrah!"

"Hurrah!" replied the crowd, at the top of their voices.

Ranulph Rookwood and his companions heard this shout. Mr. Coates had
already explained the stratagem practised upon them by the wily
highwayman, as well as the perilous situation in which he himself had
been placed; and they were in the act of returning to make good his
capture, when the loud shouts of the crew arrested them. From the
clamor, it was evident that considerable reinforcement must have arrived
from some unlooked-for quarter; and, although burning to be avenged
upon the audacious highwayman, the major felt it would be a task of
difficulty, and that extreme caution could alone ensure success. With
difficulty restraining the impatience of Ranulph, who could scarcely
brook these few minutes of needful delay, Major Mowbray gave particular
instructions to each of the men in detail, and caused several of them to
dismount. By this arrangement Mr. Coates found himself accommodated with
a steed and a pair of pistols, with which latter he vowed to wreak his
vengeance upon some of his recent tormentors. After a short space of
time occupied in this manner, the troop slowly advanced towards the
postern, in much better order than upon the previous occasion; but the
stoutest of them quailed as they caught sight of the numerous gipsy-gang
drawn out in battle array within the abbey walls. Each party scanned the
other's movements in silence and wonder, anxiously awaiting, yet in a
measure dreading, their leader's signal to begin. That signal was not
long delayed. A shot from the ranks of Rookwood did instant and bitter
execution. Rob Rust was stretched lifeless upon the ground. Nothing more
was needed. The action now became general. Fire arms were discharged on
both sides, without much damage to either party. But a rush being made
by a detachment of horse, headed by Major Mowbray, the conflict soon
became more serious. The gipsies, after the first fire, threw aside
their pistols, and fought with long knives, with which they inflicted
desperate gashes, both on men and horses. Major Mowbray was slightly
wounded in the thigh, and his steed receiving the blow intended for
himself, stumbled and threw his rider. Luckily for the major, Ranulph
Rookwood was at hand, and with the butt-end of a heavy-handled pistol
felled the ruffian to the earth, just as he was upon the point of
repeating the thrust.

Turpin, meanwhile, had taken comparatively a small share in the
conflict. He seemed to content himself with acting upon the defensive,
and except in the case of Titus Tyrconnel, whom, espying amidst the
crowd, he had considerably alarmed by sending a bullet through his wig,
he did not fire a single shot. He also succeeded in unhorsing Coates, by
hurling, with great dexterity, the empty pistol at his head. Though
apparently unconcerned in the skirmish, he did not flinch from it, but
kept his ground unyieldingly. "A charmed life" he seemed to bear; for
amid the shower of bullets, many of which were especially aimed at
himself, he came off unhurt.

"He that's born to be hanged will never be drowned, that's certain,"
said Titus. "It's no use trying to bring him down. But, by Jasus! he's
spoiled my best hat and wig, anyhow. There's a hole in my beaver as big
as a crown piece."

"Your own crown's safe, and that's some satisfaction," said Coates;
"whereas mine has a bump on it as large as a swan's egg. Ah! if we could
only get behind him."

The strife continued to rage without intermission; and though there were
now several ghastly evidences of its fury, in the shape of wounded men
and slaughtered or disabled horses, whose gaping wounds flooded the turf
with gore, it was still difficult to see upon which side victory would
eventually declare herself. The gipsies, though by far the greater
sufferers of the two, firmly maintained their ground. Drenched in the
blood of the horses they had wounded, and brandishing their long knives,
they presented a formidable and terrific appearance, the effect of which
was not at all diminished by their wild yells and savage gesticulations.
On the other hand, headed by Major Mowbray and Ranulph, the troop of
yeomen pressed on undauntedly; and where the sturdy farmers could get a
firm gripe of their lithe antagonists, or deliver a blow with their
ox-like fists, they seldom failed to make good the advantages which
superior weight and strength gave them. It will thus be seen that as yet
they were pretty well matched. Numbers were in favor of the gipsies, but
courage was equally distributed, and, perhaps, what is emphatically
called "bottom," was in favor of the rustics. Be this as it may, from
what had already occurred, there was every prospect of a very serious
termination to the fray.

From time to time Turpin glanced to the entrance of the cell, in the
expectation of seeing Sir Luke Rookwood make his appearance; and, as he
was constantly disappointed in his expectation, he could not conceal his
chagrin. At length he resolved to despatch a messenger to him, and one
of the crew accordingly departed upon this errand. He returned presently
with a look of blank dismay.

In our hasty narrative of the fight we have not paused to particularize,
neither have we enumerated, the list of the combatants. Amongst them,
however, were Jerry Juniper, the knight of Malta, and Zoroaster.
Excalibur, as may be conceived, had not been idle; but that trenchant
blade had been shivered by Ranulph Rookwood in the early stage of the
business, and the knight left weaponless. Zoroaster, who was not merely
a worshipper of fire, but a thorough milling-cove, had engaged to some
purpose in a pugilistic encounter with the rustics; and, having fought
several rounds, now "bore his blushing honors thick upon him." Jerry,
like Turpin, had remained tolerably quiescent. "The proper moment," he
said, "had not arrived." A fatality seemed to attend Turpin's immediate
companions. Rust was the first who fell; Wilder also was now among the
slain. Things were precisely in this condition when the messenger
returned. A marked change was instantly perceptible in Turpin's manner.
He no longer looked on with indifference. He seemed angry and
distrustful. He gnawed his lip, ever a sign with him of vexation.
Addressing a few words to those about him, he then spoke more loudly to
the rest of the crew. Being in the jargon of the tawny tribe, his words
were not intelligible to the opposite party; but their import was soon
made known by the almost instant and total relinquishment of the field
by the gipsies. They took to their heels at once, to a man, leaving only
a few desperately wounded behind them; and, flying along the intricate
ruins of the priory, baffled all pursuit, wherever it was attempted.
Jerry Juniper was the last in the retreat; but, upon receiving a hint
from Dick, he vaulted like a roe over the heads of his adversaries, and
made good his escape. Turpin alone remained. He stood like a lion at
bay, quietly regarding the huntsmen hurtling around him. Ranulph
Rookwood rode up and bade him surrender.

"Detain me not," cried he, in a voice of thunder. "If you would save her
who is dear to you, descend into that vault. Off, I say."

And Turpin shook away, with ease, the grasp that Ranulph had laid upon
him.

"Villain! you do not escape me this time," said Major Mowbray,
interposing himself between Turpin and the outlet.

"Major Mowbray, I would not have your blood upon my head," said Dick.
"Let me pass," and he levelled a pistol.

"Fire, if you dare!" said the major, raising his sword. "You pass not. I
will die rather than allow you to escape. Barricade the door. Strike him
down if he attempts to pass. Richard Turpin, I arrest you in the king's
name. You hear, my lads, in his majesty's name. I command you to assist
me in this highwayman's capture. Two hundred pounds for his head."

"Two hundred devils!" exclaimed Dick, with a laugh of disdain. "Go, seek
your mother and sister within yon vault, Major Mowbray; you will find
employment enough there."

Saying which, he suddenly forced Bess to back a few yards; then,
striking his heels sharply into her sides, ere his purpose could be
divined by the spectators, charged, and cleared the lower part of the
mouldering priory walls. This feat was apparently accomplished with no
great effort by his admirable and unequalled mare.

"By the powers!" cried Titus, "and he's given us the slip after all. And
just when we thought to make sure of him, too. Why, Mr. Coates, that
wall must be higher than a five-barred gate, or any stone wall in my own
country. It's just the most extraordinary lepp I ever set eyes on!"

"The devil's in the fellow, certainly, or in his mare," returned Coates;
"but if he escapes me, I'll forgive him. I know whither he's bound. He's
off to London with my bill of exchange. I'll be up with him. I'll track
him like a bloodhound, slowly and surely, as my father, the thief-taker,
used to follow up a scent. Recollect the hare and the tortoise. The race
is not always to the swift. What say you? 'Tis a match for five hundred
pounds; nay, for five thousand: for there is a certain marriage
certificate in the way--a glorious golden venture! You shall go halves,
if we win. We'll have him, dead or alive. What say you for London, Mr.
Tyrconnel? Shall we start at once?"

"With all my sowl," replied Titus. "I'm with you." And away this _par
nobile_ scoured.

Ranulph, meantime, plunged into the vault. The floor was slippery, and
he had nigh stumbled. Loud and deep lamentations, and a wailing sound,
like that of a lament for the dead, resounded in his ears. A light at
the further extremity of the vault attracted his attention. He was
filled with terrible forebodings; but the worst reality was not so
terrible as suspense. He rushed towards the light. He passed the massive
pillars, and there, by the ruddy torch flame, discovered two female
figures. One was an old woman, fantastically attired, wringing her
hands, and moaning, or gibbering wild strains in broken, discordant, yet
pathetic tones. The other was Mrs. Mowbray. Both were images of despair.
Before them lay some motionless object. He noticed not that old woman;
he scarcely saw Mrs. Mowbray; he beheld only that object of horror. It
was the lifeless body of a female. The light fell imperfectly upon the
face; he could not discern the features, but the veil in which it was
swathed: that veil was Eleanor's! He asked no more.

With a wild cry he rushed forward. "Eleanor, my beloved!" shrieked he.

Mrs. Mowbray started at his voice, but appeared stunned and helpless.

"She is dead," said Ranulph, stooping towards the body. "Dead--dead!"

"Ay," echoed the old woman, in accents of equal anguish--"dead--dead!"

"But this is _not_ Eleanor," exclaimed he, as he viewed the features
more closely. "This face, though beautiful, is not hers. This
dishevelled hair is black. The long lashes that shade her cheek are of
the same hue. She is scarce dead. The hand I clasp is yet warm--the
fingers are pliant."

"Yet she is dead," said the old woman, in a broken voice, "she is
slain."

"Who hath slain her?" asked Ranulph.

"I--I--her mother, slew her."

"You!" exclaimed Ranulph, horror-stricken. "And where is Eleanor?" asked
he. "Was she not here?"

"Better she were here now, even though she were as that poor maid,"
groaned Mrs. Mowbray, "than where she is."

"Where is she, then?" asked Ranulph, with frantic eagerness.

"Fled. Whither I know not."

"With whom?"

"With Sir Luke Rookwood--with Alan Rookwood. They have borne her hence.
Ranulph, you are too late."

"Gone!" cried Ranulph, fiercely springing to his feet. "How escaped
they? There appears to be but one entrance to this vault. I will search
each nook and cranny."

"'Tis vain," replied Mrs. Mowbray. "There is another outlet through yon
cell. By that passage they escaped."

"Too true, too true," shouted Ranulph, who flew to examine the cell.
"And wherefore followed you not?"

"The stone rolled to its mouth, and resisted my efforts. I could not
follow."

"Torture and death! She is lost to me for ever!" cried Ranulph,
bitterly.

"No!" exclaimed Barbara, clutching his arm. "Place your trust in me, and
I will find her for you."

"You!" ejaculated Ranulph.

"Even I," replied Barbara. "Your wrongs shall be righted--my Sybil be
avenged."