_BLACK BESS_

    _Dauphin._ I will not change my horse with any that treads but on
    four pasterns. _Ca, ha!_ He bounds from the earth as if his entrails
    were hairs; _le cheval volant_, the Pegasus _qui a les narines de
    feu_! When I bestride him, I soar, I am a hawk: he trots the air;
    the earth sings when he touches it; the basest horn of his hoof is
    more musical than the pipe of Hermes.

                                     SHAKESPEARE: _Henry V., Act III._


Black Bess being undoubtedly the heroine of the Fourth Book of this
Romance, we may, perhaps, be pardoned for expatiating a little in this
place upon her birth, parentage, breeding, appearance, and attractions.
And first as to her pedigree; for in the horse, unlike the human
species, nature has strongly impressed the noble or ignoble caste. He is
the real aristocrat, and the pure blood that flows in the veins of the
gallant steed will infallibly be transmitted, if his mate be suitable,
throughout all his line. Bess was no _cock-tail_. She was thorough-bred;
she boasted blood in every bright and branching vein:

    If blood can give nobility,
      A noble steed was she;
    Her sire was blood, and blood her dam,
      And all her pedigree.

As to her pedigree. Her sire was a desert Arab, renowned in his day, and
brought to this country by a wealthy traveller; her dam was an English
racer, coal-black as her child. Bess united all the fire and gentleness,
the strength and hardihood, the abstinence and endurance of fatigue of
the one, with the spirit and extraordinary fleetness of the other. How
Turpin became possessed of her is of little consequence. We never heard
that he paid a heavy price for her; though we doubt if any sum would
have induced him to part with her. In color, she was perfectly black,
with a skin smooth on the surface as polished jet; not a single white
hair could be detected in her satin coat. In make she was magnificent.
Every point was perfect, beautiful, compact; modelled, in little, for
strength and speed. Arched was her neck, as that of the swan; clean and
fine were her lower limbs, as those of the gazelle; round and sound as a
drum was her carcase, and as broad as a cloth-yard shaft her width of
chest. Hers were the "_pulchræ clunes, breve caput, arduaque cervix_,"
of the Roman bard. There was no redundancy of flesh, 'tis true; her
flanks might, to please some tastes, have been rounder, and her
shoulders fuller; but look at the nerve and sinew, palpable through the
veined limbs! She was built more for strength than beauty, and yet she
_was_ beautiful. Look at that elegant little head; those thin, tapering
ears, closely placed together; that broad, snorting nostril, which seems
to snuff the gale with disdain; that eye, glowing and large as the
diamond of Giamschid! Is she not beautiful? Behold her paces! how
gracefully she moves! She is off!--no eagle on the wing could skim the
air more swiftly. Is she not superb? As to her temper, the lamb is not
more gentle. A child might guide her.

But hark back to Dick Turpin. We left him rattling along in superb
style, and in the highest possible glee. He could not, in fact, be
otherwise than exhilarated; nothing being so wildly intoxicating as a
mad gallop. We seem to start out of ourselves--to be endued, for the
time, with new energies. Our thoughts take wings rapid as our steed. We
feel as if his fleetness and boundless impulses were for the moment our
own. We laugh; we exult; we shout for very joy. We cry out with
Mephistopheles, but in anything but a sardonic mood, "What I enjoy with
spirit, is it the less my own on that account? If I can pay for six
horses, are not their powers mine! I drive along, and am a proper man,
as if I had four-and-twenty legs!" These were Turpin's sentiments
precisely. Give him four legs and a wide plain, and he needed no
Mephistopheles to bid him ride to perdition as fast as his nag could
carry him. Away, away!--the road is level, the path is clear. Press on,
thou gallant steed, no obstacle is in thy way!--and, lo! the moon breaks
forth! Her silvery light is thrown over the woody landscape. Dark
shadows are cast athwart the road, and the flying figures of thy rider
and thyself are traced, like giant phantoms, in the dust!

Away, away! our breath is gone in keeping up with this tremendous run.
Yet Dick Turpin has not lost his wind, for we hear his cheering
cry--hark! he sings. The reader will bear in mind that Oliver means the
moon--to "whiddle" is to blab.

    OLIVER WHIDDLES!

    Oliver whiddles--the tattler old!
    Telling what best had been left untold.
    Oliver ne'er was a friend of mine;
    All glims I hate that so brightly shine.
    Give me a night black as hell, and then
    See what I'll show to you, my merry men.

    Oliver whiddles!--who cares--who cares,
    If down upon us he peers and stares?
    Mind him who will, with his great white face,
    Boldly _I'll_ ride by his glim to the chase;
    Give him a Rowland, and loudly as ever
    Shout, as I show myself, "Stand and deliver!"

"Egad," soliloquized Dick, as he concluded his song, looking up at the
moon. "Old Noll's no bad fellow, either. I wouldn't be without his white
face to-night for a trifle. He's as good as a lamp to guide one, and let
Bess only hold on as she goes now, and I'll do it with ease. Softly,
wench, softly--dost not see it's a hill we're rising. The devil's in the
mare, she cares for nothing." And as they ascended the hill, Dick's
voice once more awoke the echoes of night.


    WILL DAVIES AND DICK TURPIN

    Hodiè mihi, cràs tibi.--SAINT AUGUSTIN.

    One night, when mounted on my mare,
    To Bagshot Heath I did repair,
    And saw Will Davies hanging there,
    Upon the gibbet bleak and bare,
        _With a rustified, fustified, mustified air!_

    Within his chains bold Will looked blue,
    Gone were his sword and snappers too,
    Which served their master well and true;
    Says I, "Will Davies, how are you?
        _With your rustified, fustified, mustified air!_"

    Says he, "Dick Turpin, here I be,
    Upon the gibbet, as you see;
    I take the matter easily;
    _You'll_ have your turn as well as me,
        _With your whistle-me, pistol-me, cut-my-throat air!_"

    Says I, "That's very true, my lad;
    Meantime, with pistol and with prad,
    I'm quite contented as I am,
    And heed the gibbet not a d--n!
        _With its rustified, fustified, mustified air!_"

"Poor Will Davies!" sighed Dick; "Bagshot ought never to forget
him."[110]

    For never more shall Bagshot see
    A highwayman of such degree,
    Appearance, and gentility,
    As Will, who hangs upon the tree,
        _With his rustified, fustified, mustified air!_

"Well," mused Turpin, "I suppose one day it will be with me like all the
rest of 'em, and that I shall dance a long lavolta to the music of the
four whistling winds, as my betters have done before me; but I trust,
whenever the chanter-culls and last-speech scribblers get hold of me,
they'll at least put no cursed nonsense into my mouth, but make me
speak, as I have ever felt, like a man who never either feared death, or
turned his back upon his friend. In the mean time I'll give them
something to talk about. This ride of mine shall ring in their ears long
after I'm done for--put to bed with a mattock, and tucked up with a
spade.

    And when I am gone, boys, each huntsman shall say,
    None rode like Dick Turpin, so far in a day.

And thou, too, brave Bess!--thy name shall be linked with mine, and
we'll go down to posterity together; and what," added he, despondingly,
"if it should be too much for thee? what if----but no matter! Better die
now, while I am with thee, than fall into the knacker's hands. Better
die with all thy honors upon thy head, than drag out thy old age at the
sand-cart. Hark forward, lass--hark forward!"

By what peculiar instinct is it that this noble animal, the horse, will
at once perceive the slightest change in his rider's physical
temperament, and allow himself so to be influenced by it, that,
according as his master's spirits fluctuate, will his own energies rise
and fall, wavering

    From walk to trot, from canter to full speed?

How is it, we ask of those more intimately acquainted with the
metaphysics of the Houyhnhnm than we pretend to be? Do the saddle or
the rein convey, like metallic tractors, vibrations of the spirit
betwixt the two? We know not, but this much is certain, that no servant
partakes so much of the character of his master as the horse. The steed
we are wont to ride becomes a portion of ourselves. He thinks and feels
with us. As we are lively, he is sprightly; as we are depressed, his
courage droops. In proof of this, let the reader see what horses some
men make--_make_, we say, because in such hands their character is
wholly altered. Partaking, in a measure, of the courage and the firmness
of the hand that guides them, and of the resolution of the frame that
sways them--what their rider wills, they do, or strive to do. When that
governing power is relaxed, their energies are relaxed likewise; and
their fine sensibilities supply them with an instant knowledge of the
disposition and capacity of the rider. A gift of the gods is the gallant
steed, which, like any other faculty we possess, to use or to abuse--to
command or to neglect--rests with ourselves; he is the best general test
of our own self-government.

Black Bess's action amply verified what we have just asserted; for
during Turpin's momentary despondency, her pace was perceptibly
diminished and her force retarded; but as he revived, she rallied
instantly, and, seized apparently with a kindred enthusiasm, snorted
joyously as she recovered her speed. Now was it that the child of the
desert showed herself the undoubted offspring of the hardy loins from
whence she sprung. Full fifty miles had she sped, yet she showed no
symptoms of distress. If possible, she appeared fresher than when she
started. She had breathed; her limbs were suppler; her action was freer,
easier, lighter. Her sire, who, upon his trackless wilds, could have
outstripped the pestilent simoom; and with throat unslaked, and hunger
unappeased, could thrice have seen the scorching sun go down, had not
greater powers of endurance. His vigor was her heritage. Her dam, who
upon the velvet sod was of almost unapproachable swiftness, and who had
often brought her owner golden assurances of her worth, could scarce
have kept pace with her, and would have sunk under a third of her
fatigue. But Bess was a paragon. We ne'er shall look upon her like
again, unless we can prevail upon some Bedouin chief to present us with
a brood mare, and then the racing world shall see what a breed we will
introduce into this country. Eclipse, Childers, or Hambletonian, shall
be nothing to our colts, and even the railroad slow travelling, compared
with the speed of our new nags!

But to return to Bess, or rather to go along with her, for there is no
halting now; we are going at the rate of twenty knots an hour--sailing
before the wind; and the reader must either keep pace with us, or drop
astern. Bess is now in her speed, and Dick happy. Happy! he is
enraptured--maddened--furious--intoxicated as with wine. Pshaw! wine
could never throw him into such a burning delirium. Its choicest juices
have no inspiration like this. Its fumes are slow and heady. This is
ethereal, transporting. His blood spins through his veins; winds round
his heart; mounts to his brain. Away! away! He is wild with joy. Hall,
cot, tree, tower, glade, mead, waste, or woodland, are seen, passed,
left behind, and vanish as in a dream. Motion is scarcely
perceptible--it is impetus! volition! The horse and her rider are driven
forward, as it were, by self-accelerated speed. A hamlet is visible in
the moonlight. It is scarcely discovered ere the flints sparkle beneath
the mare's hoofs. A moment's clatter upon the stones, and it is left
behind. Again it is the silent, smiling country. Now they are buried in
the darkness of woods; now sweeping along on the wide plain; now
clearing the unopened toll-bar; now trampling over the hollow-sounding
bridge, their shadows momently reflected in the placid mirror of the
stream; now scaling the hill-side a thought more slowly; now plunging,
as the horses of Ph[oe]bus into the ocean, down its precipitous sides.

The limits of two shires are already past. They are within the confines
of a third. They have entered the merry county of Huntingdon; they have
surmounted the gentle hill that slips into Godmanchester. They are by
the banks of the rapid Ouse. The bridge is past; and as Turpin rode
through the deserted streets of Huntingdon, he heard the eleventh hour
given from the iron tongue of St. Mary's spire. In four hours--it was
about seven when he started--Dick had accomplished full sixty miles!

A few reeling topers in the streets saw the horseman flit past, and one
or two windows were thrown open; but Peeping Tom of Coventry would have
had small chance of beholding the unveiled beauties of Queen Godiva had
she ridden at the rate of Dick Turpin. He was gone, like a meteor,
almost as soon as he appeared.

Huntingdon is left behind, and he is once more surrounded by dew-gemmed
hedges and silent slumbering trees. Broad meadows, or pasture land, with
drowsy cattle, or low bleating sheep, lie on either side. But what to
Turpin, at that moment, is nature, animate or inanimate? He thinks only
of his mare--his future fame. None are by to see him ride; no
stimulating plaudits ring in his ears; no thousand hands are clapping;
no thousand voices huzzaing; no handkerchiefs are waved; no necks
strained; no bright eyes rain influence upon him; no eagle orbs watch
his motions; no bells are rung; no cup awaits his achievement; no
sweepstakes--no plate. But his will be renown--everlasting renown; his
will be fame which will not die with him--which will keep his
reputation, albeit a tarnished one, still in the mouths of men. He wants
all these adventitious excitements, but he has that within which is a
greater excitement than all these. He is conscious that he is doing a
deed to live by. If not riding for _life_, he is riding for
_immortality_; and as the hero may perchance feel--for even a highwayman
may feel like a hero,--when he willingly throws away his existence in
the hope of earning a glorious name, Turpin cared not what might befall
himself, so he could proudly signalize himself as the first of his land,

    _And witch the world with noble horsemanship!_

What need had he of spectators? The eye of posterity was upon him; he
felt the influence of that Argus glance which has made many a poor wight
spur on his Pegasus with not half so good a chance of reaching the goal
as Dick Turpin. Multitudes, yet unborn, he knew would hear and laud his
deeds. He trembled with excitement, and Bess trembled under him. But the
emotion was transient. On, on they fly! The torrent leaping from the
crag--the bolt from the bow--the air-cleaving eagle--thoughts themselves
are scarce more winged in their flight!


[110] This, we regret to say, is not the case. The memory of bold Will
Davies, the "_Golden Farmer_"--so named from the circumstances of his
always paying his rent in gold,--is fast declining upon his peculiar
domain, Bagshot. The inn, which once bore his name, still remains to
point out to the traveller the dangers his forefathers had to encounter
in crossing this extensive heath. Just beyond this house the common
spreads out for miles on all aides in a most gallop-inviting style; and
the passenger, as he gazes from the box of some flying coach, as we have
done, upon the gorse-covered waste, may, without much stretch of fancy,
imagine he beholds Will Davies careering like the wind over its wild and
undulating expanse. We are sorry to add that the "_Golden_ Farmer" has
altered its designation to the "_Jolly_ Farmer." This should be amended;
and when next we pass that way, we hope to see the original sign
restored. We cannot afford to lose our _golden_ farmers.