_THE STORM_

    Come, list, and hark! the bell doth towle,
    For some but now departing sowle;
    And was not that some ominous fowle?
    The bat, the night-crow, or screech-owle?
    To these I hear the wild wolf howle,
    In this dark night that seems to scowle;--
    All these my blacke-booke shall enrowle,
    For hark! still hark! the bell doth towle
    For some but new-departed sowle!

                                           HAYWOOD: _Rape of Lucrece_.


The night was wild and stormy. The day had been sultry, with a lurid,
metallic-looking sky, hanging like a vast galvanic plate over the face
of nature. As evening drew on, everything betokened the coming tempest.
Unerring indications of its approach were noted by the weatherwise at
the hall. The swallow was seen to skim the surface of the pool so
closely that he ruffled its placid mirror as he passed; and then,
sharply darting round and round, with twittering scream, he winged his
rapid flight to his clay-built home, beneath the barn eaves. The kine
that had herded to the margin of the water, and sought, by splashing, to
relieve themselves from the keen persecution of their myriad insect
tormentors, wended stallwards, undriven, and deeply lowing. The deer,
that at twilight had trooped thither also for refreshment, suddenly,
"with expanded nostrils, snuffed the air," and bounded off to their
coverts, amidst the sheltering fernbrake. The rooks "obstreperous of
wing, in crowds combined," cawed in a way that, as plainly as words
could have done, bespoke their apprehension; and were seen, some
hovering and beating the air with flapping pinion, others shooting
upwards in mid space, as if to reconnoitre the weather; while others,
again, were croaking to their mates, in loud discordant tone, from the
highest branches of the lime-trees; all, seemingly, as anxious and as
busy as mariners before a gale of wind. At sunset, the hazy vapors,
which had obscured the horizon throughout the day, rose up in spiral
volumes, like smoke from a burning forest, and, becoming gradually
condensed, assumed the form of huge, billowy masses, which, reflecting
the sun's light, changed, as the sinking orb declined, from purple to
flame-color, and thence to ashy, angry gray. Night rushed onwards, like
a sable steed. There was a dead calm. The stillness was undisturbed,
save by an intermittent, sighing wind, which, hollow as a murmur from
the grave, died as it rose. At once the gray clouds turned to an inky
blackness. A single, sharp, intensely vivid flash, shot from the bosom
of the rack, sheer downwards, and struck the earth with a report like
that of a piece of ordnance. In ten minutes it was dunnest night, and a
rattling thunder-storm.

The progress of the storm was watched with infinite apprehension by the
crowd of tenantry assembled in the great hall; and loud and frequent
were the ejaculations uttered, as each succeeding peal burst over their
heads. There was, however, one amongst the assemblage who seemed to
enjoy the uproar. A kindred excitement appeared to blaze in his glances,
as he looked upon the storm without. This was Peter Bradley. He stood
close by the window, and shaded not his eyes, even before the fiercest
flashes. A grin of unnatural exhilaration played upon his features, and
he seemed to exult in, and to court, the tempestuous horrors, which
affected the most hardy amongst his companions with consternation, and
made all shrink, trembling, into the recesses of the room. Peter's
conduct was not unobserved, nor his reputation for unholy dealing
forgotten. To some he was almost as much an object of dread as the storm
itself.

"Didst ever see the like o' that?" said Farmer Burtenshaw--one of the
guests, whose round, honest face good wine had recently empurpled, but
fear had now mottled white,--addressing a neighbor. "Didst ever hear of
any man that were a Christian laughing in the very face o' a
thunder-storm, with the lightnin' fit to put out his eyes, and the
rattle above ready to break the drums o' his ears? I always thought
Peter Bradley was not exactly what he ought to be, and now I am sure on
it."

"For my part, I think, Neighbor Burtenshaw," returned the other, "that
this great burst of weather's all of his raising, for in all my born
days I never see'd such a hurly-burly, and hope never to see the like of
it again. I've heard my grandfather tell of folk as could command wind
and rain; and, mayhap, Peter may have the power--we all know he can do
more nor any other man."

"We know, at all events," replied Burtenshaw, "that he lives like no
other man; that he spends night after night by himself in that dreary
churchyard; that he keeps no living thing, except an old terrier dog, in
his crazy cottage; and that he never asks a body into his house from one
year's end to another. I've never crossed his threshold these twenty
years. But," continued he mysteriously, "I happened to pass the house
one dark, dismal night, and there what dost think I see'd through the
window?"

"What--what didst see?"

"Peter Bradley sitting with a great book open on his knees; it were a
Bible, I think, and he crying like a child."

"Art sure o' that?"

"The tears were falling fast upon the leaves," returned Burtenshaw; "but
when I knocked at the door, he hastily shut up the book, and ordered me
to be gone, in a surly tone, as if he were ashamed of being caught in
the fact."

"I thought no tear had ever dropped from his eye," said the other. "Why,
he laughed when his daughter Susan went off at the hall; and, when she
died, folks said he received hush-money to say nought about it. _That_
were a bad business, anyhow; and now that his grandson Luke be taken in
the fact of housebreaking, he minds it no more, not he, than if nothing
had happened."

"Don't be too sure of that," replied Burtenshaw; "he may be scheming
summat all this time. Well, I've known Peter Bradley now these
two-and-fifty years, and, excepting that one night, I never saw any good
about him, and never heard of nobody who could tell who he be, or where
he do come from."

"One thing's certain, at least," replied the other farmer--"he were
never born at Rookwood. How he came here the devil only knows. Save us!
what a crash!--this storm be all of his raising, I tell 'ee."

"He be--what he certainly will be," interposed another speaker, in a
louder tone, and with less of apprehension in his manner than his
comrade, probably from his nerves being better fortified with strong
liquor. "Dost thou think, Samuel Plant, as how Providence would entrust
the like o' him with the command of the elements? No--no, it's rank
blasphemy to suppose such a thing, and I've too much of the true
Catholic and apostate church about me, to stand by and hear that said."

"Maybe, then, he gets his power from the Prince of Darkness," replied
Plant; "no man else could go on as he does--only look at him. He seems
to be watching for the thunderbowt."

"I wish he may catch it, then," returned the other.

"That's an evil wish, Simon Toft, and thou mayst repent it."

"Not I," replied Toft; "it would be a good clearance to the neighborhood
to get rid o' th' old croaking curmudgeon."

Whether or not Peter overheard the conversation, we pretend not to say,
but at that moment a blaze of lightning showed him staring fiercely at
the group.

"As I live, he's overheard you, Simon," exclaimed Plant. "I wouldn't be
in your skin for a trifle."

"Nor I," added Burtenshaw.

"Let him overhear me," answered Toft; "who cares? he shall hear summat
worth listening to. I'm not afraid o' him or his arts, were they as
black as Beelzebuth's own; and to show you I'm not, I'll go and have a
crack with him on the spot."

"Thou'rt a fool for thy pains, if thou dost, Friend Toft," returned
Plant, "that's all I can say."

"Be advised by me, and stay here," seconded Burtenshaw, endeavoring to
hold him back.

But Toft would not be advised--

    Kings may be blest, but he was glorious,
    O'er all the ills of life victorious.

Staggering up to Peter, he laid a hard grasp upon his shoulder, and,
thus forcibly soliciting his attention, burst into a loud horse-laugh.

But Peter was, or affected to be, too much occupied to look at him.

"What dost see, man, that thou starest so?"

"It comes, it comes--the rain--the rain--a torrent--a deluge--ha, ha!
Blessed is the corpse the rain rains on. Sir Piers may be drenched
through his leaden covering by such a downfall as that--splash,
splash--fire and water and thunder, all together--is not that fine?--ha,
ha! The heavens will weep for him, though friends shed not a tear. When
did a great man's heir feel sympathy for his sire's decease? When did
his widow mourn? When doth any man regret his fellow? Never! He
rejoiceth--he maketh glad in his inmost heart--he cannot help it--it is
nature. We all pray for--we all delight in each other's destruction. We
were created to do so; or why else should we act thus? I never wept for
any man's death, but I have often laughed. Natural sympathy!--out on the
phrase! The distant heavens--the senseless trees--the impenetrable
stones--shall regret you more than man shall bewail your death with more
sincerity. Ay, 'tis well--rain on--splash, splash: it will cool the
hell-fever. Down, down--buckets and pails, ha, ha!"

There was a pause, during which the sexton, almost exhausted by the
frenzy in which he had suffered himself to be involved, seemed
insensible to all around him.

"I tell you what," said Burtenshaw to Plant, "I have always thought
there was more in Peter Bradley nor appears on the outside. He is not
what he seems to be, take my word on it. Lord love you! do you think a
man such as he pretends to be could talk in that sort of way--about
nat'ral simpering?--no such thing."

When Peter recovered, his insane merriment broke out afresh, having only
acquired fury by the pause.

"Look out, look out!" cried he; "hark to the thunder--list to the rain!
Marked ye that flash--marked ye the clock-house--and the bird upon the
roof? 'tis the rook--the great bird of the house, that hath borne away
the soul of the departed. There, there--can you not see it? it sits and
croaks through storm and rain, and never heeds at all--and wherefore
should it heed? See, it flaps its broad black wings--it croaks--ha, ha!
It comes--it comes."

And driven, it might be by the terror of the storm, from more secure
quarters, a bird, at this instant, was dashed against the window, and
fell to the ground.

"That's a call," continued Peter; "it will be over soon, and we must set
out. The dead will not need to tarry. Look at that trail of fire along
the avenue; dost see yon line of sparkles, like a rocket's tail? That's
the path the corpse will take. St. Hermes's flickering fire, Robin
Goodfellow's dancing light, or the blue flame of the corpse-candle,
which I saw flitting to the churchyard last week, was not so pretty a
sight--ha, ha! You asked me for a song a moment ago--you shall have one
now without asking."

And without waiting to consult the inclinations of his comrades, Peter
broke into the following wild strain with all the fervor of a
half-crazed improvisatore:

    THE CORPSE-CANDLE

    Lambere flamma {taphos} et circum funera pasci.

    Through the midnight gloom did a pale blue light
    To the churchyard mirk wing its lonesome flight:--
    Thrice it floated those old walls round--
    Thrice it paused--till the grave it found.
    Over the grass-green sod it glanced,
    Over the fresh-turned earth it danced,
    Like a torch in the night-breeze quivering--
    Never was seen so gay a thing!
    Never was seen so blithe a sight
    As the midnight dance of that blue light!

    Now what of that pale blue flame dost know?
    Canst tell where it comes from, or where it will go?
    Is it the soul, released from clay,
    Over the earth that takes its way,
    And tarries a moment in mirth and glee
    Where the corse it hath quitted interred shall be?
    Or is it the trick of some fanciful sprite,
    That taketh in mortal mischance delight,
    And marketh the road the coffin shall go,
    And the spot where the dead shall be soon laid low?
    Ask him who can answer these questions aright;
    I know not the cause of that pale blue light!

"I can't say I like thy song, Master Peter," said Toft, as the sexton
finished his stave, "but if thou _didst_ see a corpse-candle, as thou
call'st thy pale blue flame, whose death doth it betoken?--eh!"

"Thine own," returned Peter, sharply.

"Mine! thou lying old cheat--dost dare to say that to my face? Why, I'm
as hale and hearty as ever a man in the house. Dost think there's no
life and vigor in this arm, thou drivelling old dotard?"

Upon which, Toft seized Peter by the throat with an energy that, but for
the timely intervention of the company, who rushed to his assistance,
the prophet might himself have anticipated the doom he prognosticated.

Released from the grasp of Toft, who was held back by the bystanders,
Peter again broke forth into his eldritch laugh; and staring right into
the face of his adversary, with eyes glistening, and hands uplifted, as
if in the act of calling down an imprecation on his head, he screamed,
in a shrill and discordant voice, "Soh! you will not take my warning?
you revile me--you flout me! 'Tis well! your fate shall prove a warning
to all unbelievers--_they_ shall remember this night, though _you_ will
not. Fool! fool!--your doom has long been sealed! I saw your wraith
choose out its last lodgment on Halloween; I know the spot. Your grave
is dug already--ha, ha!" And, with renewed laughter, Peter rushed out of
the room.

"Did I not caution thee not to provoke him, friend Toft?" said Plant;
"it's ill playing with edge-tools; but don't let him fly off in that
tantrum--one of ye go after him."

"That will I," replied Burtenshaw; and he departed in search of the
sexton.

"I'd advise thee to make it up with Peter so soon as thou canst,
neighbor," continued Plant; "he's a bad friend, but a worse enemy."

"Why, what harm can he do me?" returned Toft, who, however, was not
without some misgivings. "If I must die, I can't help it--I shall go
none the sooner for him, even if he speak the truth, which I don't think
he do; and if I must, I sha'n't go unprepared--only I think as how, if
it pleased Providence, I could have wished to keep my old missus company
some few years longer, and see those bits of lasses of mine grow up
into women, and respectably provided for. But His will be done. I
sha'n't leave 'em quite penniless, and there's one eye at least, I'm
sure, won't be dry at my departure." Here the stout heart of Toft gave
way, and he shed some few "natural tears," which, however, he speedily
brushed away. "I'll tell you what, neighbors," continued he, "I think we
may all as well be thinking of going to our own homes, for, to my mind,
we shall never reach the churchyard to-night."

"That _you_ never will," exclaimed a voice behind him; and Toft, turning
round, again met the glance of Peter.

"Come, come, Master Peter," cried the good-natured farmer, "this be ugly
jesting--ax pardon for my share of it--sorry for what I did--so give us
thy hand, man, and think no more about it."

Peter extended his claw, and the parties were, apparently, once more
upon terms of friendship.