_LADY ROOKWOOD_

    _Fran. de Med._ Your unhappy husband
                    Is dead.

    _Vit. Cor._              Oh, he's a happy husband!
                    Now he owes nature nothing.

    _Mon._          And look upon this creature as his wife.
                    She comes not like a widow--she comes armed
                    With scorn and impudence. Is this a mourning habit?

                                                    _The White Devil._


The progress of our narrative demands our presence in another apartment
of the hall--a large, lonesome chamber, situate in the eastern wing of
the house, already described as the most ancient part of the
building--the sombre appearance of which was greatly increased by the
dingy, discolored tapestry that clothed its walls; the record of the
patience and industry of a certain Dame Dorothy Rookwood, who flourished
some centuries ago, and whose skilful needle had illustrated the
slaughter of the Innocents, with a severity of _gusto_, and sanguinary
minuteness of detail, truly surprising in a lady so amiable as she was
represented to have been. Grim-visaged Herod glared from the ghostly
woof, with his shadowy legions, executing their murderous purposes,
grouped like a troop of Sabbath-dancing witches around him. Mysterious
twilight, admitted through the deep, dark, mullioned windows, revealed
the antique furniture of the room, which still boasted a sort of
mildewed splendor, more imposing, perhaps, than its original gaudy
magnificence; and showed the lofty hangings, and tall, hearse-like
canopy of a bedstead, once a couch of state, but now destined for the
repose of Lady Rookwood. The stiff crimson hangings were embroidered in
gold, with the arms and cipher of Elizabeth, from whom the apartment,
having once been occupied by that sovereign, obtained the name of the
"Queen's Room."

The sole tenant of this chamber was a female, in whose countenance, if
time and strong emotion had written strange defeatures, they had not
obliterated its striking beauty and classical grandeur of expression. It
was a face majestical and severe. Pride was stamped in all its lines;
and though each passion was, by turns, developed, it was evident that
all were subordinate to the sin by which the angels fell. The contour of
her face was formed in the purest Grecian mould, and might have been a
model for Medea; so well did the gloomy grandeur of the brow, the severe
chiselling of the lip, the rounded beauty of the throat, and the
faultless symmetry of her full form, accord with the beau ideal of
antique perfection. Shaded by smooth folds of raven hair, which still
maintained its jetty dye, her lofty forehead would have been displayed
to the greatest advantage, had it not been at this moment knit and
deformed by excess of passion, if that passion can be said to deform
which only calls forth strong and vehement expression. Her figure, which
wanted only height to give it dignity, was arrayed in the garb of
widowhood; and if she exhibited none of the desolation of heart which
such a bereavement might have been expected to awaken, she was evidently
a prey to feelings scarcely less harrowing. At the particular time of
which we speak, Lady Rookwood, for she it was, was occupied in the
investigation of the contents of an escritoire. Examining the papers
which it contained with great deliberation, she threw each aside, as
soon as she had satisfied herself of its purport, until she arrived at a
little package, carefully tied up with black ribbon, and sealed. This,
Lady Rookwood hastily broke open, and drew forth a small miniature. It
was that of a female, young and beautiful, rudely, yet faithfully,
executed--faithfully, we say, for there was an air of sweetness and
simplicity--and, in short, a look of reality and nature about the
picture (it is seldom, indeed, that we mistake a likeness, even if we
are unacquainted with the original) that attested the artist's fidelity.
The face was as radiant with smiles as a bright day with sunbeams. The
portrait was set in gold, and behind it was looped a lock of the darkest
and finest hair. Underneath the miniature was written, in Sir Piers's
hand, the words "_Lady Rookwood_." A slip of folded paper was also
attached to it.

Lady Rookwood scornfully scrutinized the features for a few moments, and
then unfolded the paper, at the sight of which she started, and turned
pale. "Thank God!" she cried, "this is in my possession--while I hold
this, we are safe. Were it not better to destroy this evidence at once?
No, no, not _now_--it shall not part from me. I will abide Ranulph's
return. This document will give me a power over him such as I could
never otherwise obtain." Placing the marriage certificate, for such it
was, within her breast, and laying the miniature upon the table, she
next proceeded, deliberately, to arrange the disordered contents of the
box.

All outward traces of emotion had, ere this, become so subdued in Lady
Rookwood, that although she had, only a few moments previously,
exhibited the extremity of passionate indignation, she now, apparently
without effort, resumed entire composure, and might have been supposed
to be engaged in a matter of little interest to herself. It was a dread
calm, which they who knew her would have trembled to behold. "From these
letters I gather," exclaimed she, "that their wretched offspring knows
not of his fortune. So far, well. There is no channel whence he can
derive information, and my first care shall be to prevent his obtaining
any clue to the secret of his birth. I am directed to provide for
him--ha! ha! I will provide--a grave! There will I bury him and his
secret. My son's security and my own wrong demand it. I must choose
surer hands--the work must not be half-done, as heretofore. And now, I
bethink me, he is in the neighborhood, connected with a gang of
poachers--'tis as I could wish it."

At this moment a knock at the chamber-door broke upon her meditations.
"Agnes, is it you?" demanded Lady Rookwood.

Thus summoned, the old attendant entered the room.

"Why are my orders disobeyed?" asked the lady, in a severe tone of
voice. "Did I not say, when you delivered me this package from Mr.
Coates, which he himself wished to present, that I would not be
disturbed?"

"You did, my lady, but----"

"Speak out," said Lady Rookwood, somewhat more mildly, perceiving, from
Agnes's manner, that she had something of importance to communicate.
"What is it brings you hither?"

"I am sorry," returned Agnes, "to disturb your ladyship, but--but----"

"But what?" interrupted Lady Rookwood, impatiently.

"I could not help it, my lady--he would have me come; he said he was
resolved to see your ladyship, whether you would or not."

"Would see me, ha! is it so? I guess his errand, and its object--he has
some suspicion. No, that cannot be; he would not dare to tamper with
these seals. Agnes, I will _not_ see him."

"But he swears, my lady, that he will not leave the house without seeing
you--he would have forced his way into your presence, if I had not
consented to announce him."

"Insolent!" exclaimed Lady Rookwood, with a glance of indignation;
"force his way! I promise you he shall not display an equal anxiety to
repeat the visit. Tell Mr. Coates I will see him."

"Mr. Coates! Mercy on us, my lady, it's not he. He'd never have intruded
upon you unasked. No such thing. He knows his place too well. No, no;
it's not Mr. Coates----"

"If not he, who is it?"

"Luke Bradley; your ladyship knows whom I mean."

"He here--now?----"

"Yes, my lady; and looking so fierce and strange, I was quite frightened
to see him. He looked so like his--his----"

"His father, you would say. Speak out."

"No, my lady, his grandfather--old Sir Reginald. He's the very image of
him. But had not your ladyship better ring the alarm-bell? and when he
comes in, I'll run and fetch the servants--he's dangerous, I'm sure."

"I have no fears of him. He _will_ see me, you say----"

"Ay, _will_!" exclaimed Luke, as he threw open the door, and shut it
forcibly after him, striding towards Lady Rookwood, "nor abide longer
delay."

It was an instant or two ere Lady Rookwood, thus taken by surprise,
could command speech. She fixed her eyes with a look of keen and angry
inquiry upon the bold intruder, who, nothing daunted, confronted her
glances with a gaze as stern and steadfast as her own.

"Who are you, and what seek you?" exclaimed Lady Rookwood, after a brief
pause, and, in spite of herself, her voice sounded tremulously. "What
would you have, that you venture to appear before me at this season and
in this fashion?"

"I might have chosen a fitter opportunity," returned Luke, "were it
needed. My business will not brook delay--you must be pleased to
overlook this intrusion on your privacy, at a season of sorrow like the
present. As to the fashion of my visit, you must be content to excuse
it. I cannot help myself. I may amend hereafter. Who I am, you are able,
I doubt not, to divine. What I seek, you shall hear, when this old woman
has left the room, unless you would have a witness to a declaration that
concerns you as nearly as myself."

An indefinite feeling of apprehension had, from the first instant of
Luke's entrance crossed Lady Rookwood's mind. She, however, answered,
with some calmness:

"What you can have to say is of small moment to me--nor does it signify
who may hear it. It shall not, however, be said that Lady Rookwood
feared to be alone, even though she endangered her life."

"I am no assassin," replied Luke, "nor have sought the destruction of my
deadliest foe--though 'twere but retributive justice to have done so."

Lady Rookwood started.

"Nay, you need not fear me," replied Luke; "my revenge will be otherwise
accomplished."

"Go," said Lady Rookwood to Agnes; "yet--stay without, in the
antechamber."

"My lady," said Agnes, scarcely able to articulate, "shall I----"

"Hear me, Lady Rookwood," interrupted Luke. "I repeat, I intend you no
injury. My object here is solely to obtain a private conference. You can
have no reason for denying me this request. I will not abuse your
patience. Mine is no idle mission. Say you refuse me, and I will at once
depart. I will find other means of communicating with you--less direct,
and therefore less desirable. Make your election. But we _must_ be
alone--undisturbed. Summon your household--let them lay hands upon me,
and I will proclaim aloud what you would gladly hide, even from
yourself."

"Leave us, Agnes," said Lady Rookwood. "I have no fear of this man. I
can deal with him myself, should I see occasion."

"Agnes," said Luke, in a stern, deep whisper, arresting the ancient
handmaiden as she passed him, "stir not from the door till I come forth.
Have you forgotten your former mistress!--my mother? Have you forgotten
Barbara Lovel, and _that night_?"

"In Heaven's name, hush!" replied Agnes, with a shudder.

"Let that be fresh in your memory. Move not a footstep, whatever you may
hear," added he, in the same tone as before.

"I will not--I will not." And Agnes departed.

Luke felt some wavering in his resolution when he found himself alone
with the lady, whose calm, collected, yet haughty demeanor, as she
resumed her seat, prepared for his communication, could not fail to
inspire him with a certain degree of awe. Not unconscious of her
advantage, nor slow to profit by it, Lady Rookwood remained perfectly
silent, with her eyes steadily fixed upon his face, while his
embarrassment momentarily increased. Summoning, at length, courage
sufficient to address her, and ashamed of his want of nerve, he thus
broke forth:

"When I entered this room, you asked my name and object. As to the
first, I answer to the same designation as your ladyship. I have long
borne my mother's name. I now claim my father's. My object is, the
restitution of my rights."

"Soh!--it is as I suspected," thought Lady Rookwood, involuntarily
casting her large eyes down. "Do I hear you rightly?" exclaimed she,
aloud; "your name is----"

"Sir Luke Rookwood. As my father's elder born; by right of _his_ right
to that title."

If a glance could have slain him, Luke had fallen lifeless at the lady's
feet. With a smile of ineffable disdain, she replied, "I know not why I
hesitate to resent this indignity, even for an instant. But I would see
how far your audacity will carry you. The name you bear is Bradley?"

"In ignorance I have done so," replied Luke. "I am the son of her whose
maiden name was Bradley. She was----"

"'Tis false--I will not hear it--she was _not_," cried Lady Rookwood,
her vehemence getting the master of her prudence.

"Your ladyship anticipates my meaning," returned Luke. "Susan Bradley
was the first wife of Sir Piers Rookwood."

"His minion--his mistress if you will; nought else. Is it new to you,
that a village wench, who lends herself to shame, should be beguiled by
such shallow pretences? That she was so duped, I doubt not. But it is
too late now to complain, and I would counsel you not to repeat your
idle boast. It will serve no other purpose, trust me, than to blazon
forth your own--your mother's dishonor."

"Lady Rookwood," sternly answered Luke, "my mother's fame is as free
from dishonor as your own. I repeat, she was the first wife of Sir
Piers; and that I, her child, am first in the inheritance; nay, sole
heir to the estates and title of Rookwood, to the exclusion of your son.
Ponder upon that intelligence. Men say they fear you, as a thing of ill.
_I_ fear you not. There _have_ been days when the Rookwoods held their
dames in subjection. Discern you nought of that in me?"

Once or twice during this speech Lady Rookwood's glances had wandered
towards the bell-cord, as if about to summon aid; but the intention was
abandoned almost as soon as formed, probably from apprehension of the
consequences of any such attempt. She was not without alarm as to the
result of the interview, and was considering how she could bring it to a
termination without endangering herself, and, if possible, secure the
person of Luke, when the latter, turning sharply round upon her, and
drawing a pistol, exclaimed,--

"Follow me!"

"Whither?" asked she, in alarm.

"To the chamber of death!"

"Why there? what would you do? Villain! I will not trust my life with
you. I will _not_ follow you."

"Hesitate not, as you value your life. Do aught to alarm the house, and
I fire. Your safety depends upon yourself. I would see my father's body
ere it be laid in the grave. I will not leave you here."

"Go," said Lady Rookwood; "if that be all, I pledge myself you shall not
be interrupted."

"I will not take your pledge; your presence shall be my surety. By my
mother's unavenged memory, if you play me false, though all your
satellites stand around you, you die upon the spot! Obey me, and you are
safe. Our way leads to the room by the private staircase--we shall pass
unobserved--you see I know the road. The room, by your own command, is
vacant--save of the dead. We shall, therefore, be alone. This done, I
depart. You will then be free to act. Disobey me, and your blood be upon
your own head."

"Lead on!" said Lady Rookwood, pressing towards the antechamber.

"The door I mean is there," pointing to another part of the room--"that
panel,--"

"Ha! how know you that?"

"No matter; follow."

Luke touched a spring, and the panel flying open, disclosed a dim
recess, into which he entered; and, seizing Lady Rookwood's hand,
dragged her after him.