_SAINT CYPRIAN'S CELL_

    Lasciate ogni speranza voi ch' entrate.

                                                                DANTE.


Cyprian de Mulverton, fifth prior of the monastery of Saint Francis, a
prelate of singular sanctity, being afflicted, in his latter days, with
a despondency so deep that neither penance nor fasting could remove it,
vowed never again to behold, with earthly eyes, the blessed light of
heaven, nor to dwell longer with his fellowmen; but, relinquishing his
spiritual dignity, "the world forgetting, by the world forgot," to
immure himself, while living, within the tomb.

He kept his vow. Out of the living rock that sustained the saintly
structure, beneath the chapel of the monastery, was another chapel
wrought, and thither, after bidding an eternal farewell to the world,
and bestowing his benediction upon his flock, whom he committed to the
care of his successor, the holy man retired.

Never, save at midnight, and then only during the performance of masses
for his soul's repose, did he ascend from his cell: and as the sole
light allowed within the dismal dungeon of his choice was that of a
sepulchral lamp, as none spoke with him when in his retreat, save in
muttered syllables, what effect must the lustre emanating from a
thousand tapers, the warm and pungent odors of the incense-breathing
shrine, contrasted with the earthy vapors of his prison-house, and the
solemn swell of the Sanctus, have had upon his excited senses? Surely
they must have seemed like a foretaste of the heaven he sought to gain!

Ascetic to the severest point to which nature's endurance could be
stretched, Cyprian even denied himself repose. He sought not sleep, and
knew it only when it stole on him unawares. His couch was the flinty
rock; and long afterwards, when the zealous resorted to the sainted
prior's cell, and were shown those sharp and jagged stones, they
marvelled how one like unto themselves could rest, or even recline upon
their points without anguish, until it was explained to them that,
doubtless, He who tempereth the wind to the shorn lamb had made that
flinty couch soft to the holy sufferer as a bed of down. His limbs were
clothed in a garb of horsehair of the coarsest fabric; his drink was the
dank drops that oozed from the porous walls of his cell; and his
sustenance, such morsels as were bestowed upon him by the poor--the only
strangers permitted to approach him. No fire was suffered, where
perpetual winter reigned. None were admitted to his nightly vigils;
none witnessed any act of penance; nor were any groans heard to issue
from that dreary cave; but the knotted, blood-stained thong, discovered
near his couch, too plainly betrayed in what manner those long lone
nights were spent. Thus did a year roll on. Traces of his sufferings
were visible in his failing strength. He could scarcely crawl; but he
meekly declined assistance. He appeared not, as had been his wont, at
the midnight mass; the door of his cell was thrown open at that hour;
the light streamed down like a glory upon his reverend head; he heard
the distant reverberations of the deep _Miserere_; and breathed odors as
if wafted from Paradise.

One morn it chanced that they who sought his cell found him with his
head upon his bosom, kneeling before the image of the virgin patroness
of his shrine. Fearing to disturb his devotions, they stood reverently
looking on; and thus silently did they tarry for an hour; but, as in
that space he had shown no signs of motion, fearing the worst, they
ventured to approach him. He was cold as the marble before which he
knelt. In the act of humblest intercession--it may be, in the hope of
grace--had Cyprian's spirit fled.

"Blessed are they who die in the Lord," exclaimed his brethren,
regarding his remains with deepest awe. On being touched, the body fell
to the ground. It was little more than a skeleton.

Under the cloisters of the holy pile were his bones interred, with a
degree of pomp and ostentation that little accorded with the lowliness
and self-abasement of this man of many sorrows.

This chapel, at the time of which we treat, was pretty much in the same
condition as it existed in the days of its holy inmate. Hewn out of the
entrails of the rock, the roof, the vaults, the floor, were of solid
granite. Three huge cylindrical pillars, carved out of the native rock,
rough as the stems of gnarled oak-trees, lent support to the ceiling.
Support, however, was unneeded; an earthquake would scarce have shaken
down those solid rafters. Only in one corner, where the water welled
through a crevice of the rock, in drops that fell like tears, was decay
manifest. Here the stone, worn by the constant dripping, had, in some
places, given way. In shape, the vault was circular. The integral
between each massive pillar formed a pointed arch. Again, from each
pillar sprang other arches, which, crossed by diagonal, ogive branches,
weaving one into the other, and radiating from the centre, formed those
beautifully intricate combinations upon which the eye of the
architectural enthusiast loves to linger. Within the ring formed by
these triple columns, in which again the pillars had their own web of
arches, was placed an altar of stone, and beside it a crucifix of the
same rude material. Here also stood the sainted image of her who had
filled the prior with holy aspirations, now a shapeless stone. The dim
lamp, that, like a star struggling with the thick gloom of a wintry
cell, had shed its slender radiance over the brow of the Virgin Thecla,
was gone. But around the keystone of the central arches, whence a chain
had once depended, might be traced in ancient characters, half effaced
by time, the inscription:

    STA. THECLA ORA PRO NOBIS.

One outlet only was there from the chapel--that which led by winding
steps to the monastery; one only recess--the prior's cell. The former
faced the altar; the latter yawned like the mouth of a tomb at its back.
Altogether it was a dreary place. Dumb were its walls as when they
refused to return the murmured orisons of the anchorite. One uniform sad
coloring prevailed throughout. The gray granite was grown hoar with age,
and had a ghostly look; the columns were ponderous, and projected heavy
shadows. Sorrow and superstition had their tale, and a moral gloom
deepened the darkness of the spot. Despair, which had inspired its
construction, seemed to brood therein. Hope shunned its inexorable
recesses.

Alone, within this dismal sanctuary, with hands outstretched towards the
desecrated image of its tutelar saint, knelt Sybil. All was darkness.
Neither the heavy vapors that surrounded her, nor the shrine before
which she bent, were visible; but, familiar with the dreary spot, she
knew that she had placed herself aright. Her touch had satisfied her
that she bowed before the altar of stone; that her benighted vision was
turned towards the broken image of the saint, though now involved in
gloom the most profound; and with clasped hands and streaming eyes, in
low and mournful tones, she addressed herself in the following hymn to
the tutelar saint of the spot:

    HYMN TO SAINT THECLA

    In my trouble, in my anguish,
      In the depths of my despair,
    As in grief and pain I languish,
      Unto thee I raise my prayer.
    Sainted virgin! martyr'd maiden!
      Let thy countenance incline
    Upon one with woes o'erladen,
      Kneeling lowly at thy shrine;
    That in agony, in terror,
      In her blind perplexity,
    Wandering weak in doubt and error,
      Calleth feebly upon thee.
    Sinful thoughts, sweet saint, oppress me,
      Thoughts that will not be dismissed;
    Temptations dark possess me,
      Which my strength may not resist.
    I am full of pain, and weary
      Of my life; I fain would die:
    Unto me the world is dreary;
      To the grave for rest I fly.
    For rest!--oh! could I borrow
      Thy bright wings, celestial dove!
    They should waft me from my sorrow,
      Where peace dwells in bowers above.
          Upon one with woes o'erladen,
            Kneeling lowly at thy shrine;
          Sainted virgin! martyr'd maiden!
            Let thy countenance incline!
                    _Mei miserere Virgo,
                      Requiem æternam dona!_

    By thy loveliness, thy purity,
      Unpolluted, undefiled,
    That in serene security
      Upon earth's temptations smiled;--
    By the fetters that constrain'd thee,
      By thy flame-attested faith,
    By the fervor that sustain'd thee,
      By thine angel-ushered death;--
    By thy soul's divine elation,
      'Mid thine agonies assuring
    Of thy sanctified translation
      To beatitude enduring;--
    By the mystic interfusion
      Of thy spirit with the rays,
    That in ever bright profusion
      Round the Throne Eternal blaze;--
    By thy portion now partaken,
      With the pain-perfected just;
    Look on one of hope forsaken,
      From the gates, of mercy thrust.
          Upon one with woes o'erladen,
            Kneeling lowly at thy shrine,
          Sainted virgin! martyr'd maiden!
            Let thy countenance incline!
                    _Ora pro me mortis horâ!
                    Sancta Virgo, oro te!
                            Kyrie Eleison!_

The sweet, sad voice of the singer died faintly away. The sharpness of
her sorrow was assuaged. Seldom, indeed, is it that fervent
supplication fails to call down solace to the afflicted. Sybil became
more composed. She still, however, trembled at the thoughts of what
remained to be done.

"They will be here ere my prayer is finished," murmured she--"ere the
end is accomplished for which I came hither alone. Let me, oh! let me
make my peace with my Creator, ere I surrender my being to His hands,
and then let them deal with me as they will." And she bowed her head in
lowly prayer.

Again raising her hands, and casting her eyes towards the black ceiling,
she implored, in song, the intercession of the saintly man who had
bequeathed his name to the cell.

    HYMN TO SAINT CYPRIAN

    Hear! oh! hear me, sufferer holy,
      Who didst make thine habitation
    'Mid these rocks, devoting wholly
      Life to one long expiation
    Of thy guiltiness, and solely
      By severe mortification
    Didst deliver thee. Oh! hear me!
      In my dying moments cheer me.
              By thy penance, self-denial,
              Aid me in the hour of trial.

    May, through thee, my prayers prevailing
      On the Majesty of Heaven,
    O'er the hosts of hell, assailing
      My soul, in this dark hour be driven!
    So my spirit, when exhaling,
      May of sinfulness be shriven,
    And His gift unto the Giver
      May be rendered pure as ever!
              By thy own dark, dread possession,
              Aid me with thine intercession!

Scarcely had she concluded this hymn, when the torch of the knight of
Malta in part dissipated the gloom that hung around the chapel.