_ELEANOR MOWBRAY_

                                ----Mischiefs
    Are like the visits of Franciscan friars,
    They never come to prey upon us single.

                                                   _Devil's Law Case._


The course of our tale returns now to Eleanor Mowbray. After she had
parted from Ranulph Rookwood, and had watched him disappear beneath the
arches of the church porch, her heart sank, and, drawing herself back
within the carriage, she became a prey to the most poignant affliction.
In vain she endeavored to shake off this feeling of desolation. It would
not be. Despair had taken possession of her; the magic fabric of delight
melted away, or only gleamed to tantalize, at an unreachable distance. A
presentiment that Ranulph would never be hers had taken root in her
imagination, and overshadowed all the rest.

While Eleanor pursued this train of reflection, the time insensibly wore
away, until the sudden stoppage of the carriage aroused the party from
their meditation. Major Mowbray perceived that the occasion of the halt
was the rapid advance of a horseman, who was nearing them at full speed.
The appearance of the rider was somewhat singular, and might have
created some uneasiness as to the nature of his approach, had not the
major immediately recognized a friend; he was, nevertheless, greatly
surprised to see him, and turned to Mrs. Mowbray to inform her that
Father Ambrose, to his infinite astonishment, was coming to meet them,
and appeared, from his manner, to be the bearer of unwelcome tidings.

Father Ambrose was, perhaps, the only being whom Eleanor disliked. She
had felt an unaccountable antipathy towards him, which she could neither
extirpate nor control, during their long and close intimacy. It may be
necessary to mention that her religious culture had been in accordance
with the tenets of the Romish Church, in whose faith--the faith of her
ancestry--her mother had continued; and that Father Ambrose, with whom
she had first become acquainted during the residence of the family near
Bordeaux, was her ghostly adviser and confessor. An Englishman by birth,
he had been appointed pastor to the diocese in which they dwelt, and
was, consequently, a frequent visitor, almost a constant inmate of the
château; yet though duty and respect would have prompted her to regard
the father with affection, Eleanor could never conquer the feelings of
dislike and distrust which she had at first entertained towards him; a
dislike which was increased by the strange control in which he seemed to
hold her mother, who regarded him with a veneration approaching to
infatuation. It was, therefore, with satisfaction that she bade him
adieu. He had, however, followed his friends to England under a feigned
name as--being a recusant Romish priest, and supposed to have been
engaged in certain Jesuitical plots, his return to his own country was
attended with considerable risk--, and had now remained domesticated
with them for some months. That he had been in some way, in early life,
connected with a branch of the house of Rookwood, Eleanor was aware--she
fancied he might have been engaged in political intrigue with Sir
Reginald, which would have well accorded with his ardent, ambitious
temperament--, and the knowledge of this circumstance made her doubly
apprehensive lest the nature of his present communication should have
reference to her lover, towards whose cause the father had never been
favorable, and respecting whose situation he might have made some
discovery, which she feared he might use to Ranulph's disadvantage.

Wrapped in a long black cloak, with a broad-brimmed hat drawn closely
over his brows, it was impossible to distinguish further of the priest's
figure and features beyond the circumstance of his height, which was
remarkable, until he had reached the carriage window, when, raising his
hat, he disclosed a head that Titian might have painted, and which,
arising from the dark drapery, looked not unlike the visage of some
grave and saturnine Venetian. There was a venerable expanse of forehead,
thinly scattered with hair, towering over black pent-house-like brows,
which, in their turn, shadowed keen penetrating eyes; the temples were
hollow, and blue veins might be traced beneath the sallow skin; the
cheek-bones were high, and there was something in the face that spoke of
self-mortification; while the thin livid lips, closely compressed, and
the austere and sinister expression of his countenance, showed that his
self-abasement, if he had ever practised it, had scarcely prostrated the
demon of pride, whose dominion might still be traced in the lines and
furrows of his haughty physiognomy. The father looked at Mrs. Mowbray,
and then glanced suspiciously at Eleanor. The former appeared to
understand him.

"You would say a word to me in private," said Mrs. Mowbray; "shall I
descend?"

The priest bowed assent.

"It is not to you alone that my mission extends," said he, gravely; "you
are all in part concerned; your son had better alight with you."

"Instantly," replied the major. "If you will give your horse in charge
to the postilion, we will attend you at once."

With a feeling of renewed apprehension, connected, she knew not why,
with Ranulph, Eleanor beheld her relatives descend from the carriage;
and, in the hope of gaining some clue from their gestures to the subject
of their conversation, she watched their motions as narrowly as her
situation permitted. From the earnest manner of the priest, and the
interest his narrative seemed to excite in his hearers, it was evident
that his communication was of importance.

Presently, accompanied by Father Ambrose, Mrs. Mowbray returned to the
carriage, while the major, mounting the priest's horse, after bidding a
hasty adieu to his sister, adding, with a look that belied the
consolation intended to be conveyed by his words, that "all was well,"
but without staying to offer her any explanation of the cause of his
sudden departure, rode back the way they had just traversed, and in the
direction of Rookwood. Bereft of the only person to whom she could have
applied for information, though dying with curiosity and anxiety to know
the meaning of this singular interview and of the sudden change of plans
which she felt so intimately concerned herself, Eleanor was constrained
to preserve silence, as, after their entrance into the carriage, her
mother again seemed lost in painful reflection, and heeded her not; and
the father, drawing from his pocket a small volume, appeared intently
occupied in its perusal.

"Dear mother," said Eleanor, at length, turning to Mrs. Mowbray, "my
brother is gone----"

"To Rookwood," said Mrs. Mowbray, in a tone calculated to check further
inquiry; but Eleanor was too anxious to notice it.

"And wherefore, mother?" said she. "May I not be informed?"

"Not as yet, my child--not as yet," replied Mrs. Mowbray. "You will
learn all sufficiently early."

The priest raised his cat-like eyes from the book to watch the effect of
this speech, and dropped them instantly as Eleanor turned towards him.
She had been about to appeal to him, but having witnessed this look, she
relinquished her scarce-formed purpose, and endeavored to divert her
tristful thoughts by gazing through the glimmering medium of her tears
upon the soothing aspect of external nature--that aspect which, in
sunshine or in storm, has ever relief in store for a heart embittered by
the stormy coldness of the world.

The road, meanwhile, led them through a long woody valley, and was now
climbing the sides of a steep hill. They were soon in the vicinity of
the priory, and of the gipsies' encampment. The priest leaned forward,
and whispered something in Mrs. Mowbray's ear, who looked towards the
ruined shrine, part of the mouldering walls being visible from the road.

At the moment the clatter of a horse's hoofs, and the sound of a loud
voice, commanding the postilion, in a menacing tone, to stop,
accompanied by a volley of imprecations, interrupted the conference, and
bespoke the approach of an unwelcome intruder, and one whom all, too
truly, feared would not be readily dismissed. The postilion did his best
to rid them of the assailant. Perceiving a masked horseman behind him,
approaching at a furious rate, he had little doubt as to his intentions,
and Turpin, for it was our highwayman, soon made his doubts certainties.
He hallooed to him to stop; but the fellow paid no attention to his
command, and disregarded even the pistol which he saw, in a casual
glimpse over his near side, presented at his person. Clapping spurs into
his horse's flanks, he sought succor in flight. Turpin was by his side
in an instant. As the highwayman endeavored to catch his reins, the lad
suddenly wheeled the carriage right upon him, and but for the dexterity
of Turpin, and the clever conduct of his mare, would inevitably have
crushed him against the roadside. As it was, his left leg was slightly
grazed. Irritated at this, Turpin fired over the man's head, and with
the butt-end of the pistol felled him from his seat. Startled by the
sound, and no longer under the governance of their rider, the horses
rushed with frantic violence towards a ditch that bounded the other side
of the highway, down which the carriage was precipitated, and at once
overturned. Turpin's first act, after he had ascertained that no
mischief had been occasioned to those within, beyond the alarm incident
to the shock, was to compel the postilion, who had by this time gained
his legs, to release the horses from their traces. This done, with the
best grace he could assume, and, adjusting his mask, he opened the
carriage, and proceeded to liberate the captives.

"Beg pardon, ma'am," said he, as soon as he had released Mrs. Mowbray;
"excessively sorry, upon my soul, to have been the cause of so much
unnecessary alarm to you--all the fault, I assure you, of that rascal of
a postilion; had the fellow only pulled up when I commanded him, this
botheration might have been avoided. You will remember that, when you
pay him--all his fault, I assure you, ma'am."

Receiving no reply, he proceeded to extricate Eleanor, with whose beauty
the inflammable highwayman was instantly smitten. Leaving the father to
shift for himself, he turned to address some observation of coarse
gallantry to her; but she eluded his grasp, and flew to her mother's
side.

"It is useless, sir," said Mrs. Mowbray, as Turpin drew near them, "to
affect ignorance of your intentions. You have already occasioned us
serious alarm; much delay and inconvenience. I trust, therefore, that
beyond our purses, to which, though scantily supplied, you are welcome,
we shall sustain no molestation. You seem to have less of the ruffian
about you than the rest of your lawless race, and are not, I should
hope, destitute of common humanity."

"Common humanity!" replied Turpin: "bless you, ma'am, I'm the most
humane creature breathing--would not hurt a fly, much less a lady.
Incivility was never laid to my charge. This business may be managed in
a few seconds; and as soon as we have settled the matter, I'll lend your
stupid jack-boy a hand to put the horses to the carriage again, and get
the wheels out of the ditch. You have a banker, ma'am, I suppose, in
town--perhaps in the country; but I don't like country bankers; besides,
I want a little ready cash in Rumville--beg pardon, ma'am, London I
mean. My ears have been so stunned with those Romany patterers, I
almost _think_ in flash. Just draw me a check; I've pen and ink always
ready: a check for fifty pounds, ma'am--only fifty. What's your banker's
name? I've blank checks of all the best houses in my pocket; that and a
kiss from the pretty lips of that cherry-cheeked maid," winking to
Eleanor, "will fully content me. You see you have neither an exorbitant
nor uncivil personage to deal with."

Eleanor shrank closer towards her mother. Exhausted by previous
agitation of the night, greatly frightened by the shock which she had
just sustained, and still more alarmed by the words and gestures of the
highwayman, she felt that she was momentarily in danger of fainting, and
with difficulty prevented herself from falling. The priest, who had
succeeded in freeing himself from the carriage, now placed himself
between Turpin and the ladies.

"Be satisfied, misguided man," said the father, in a stern voice,
offering a purse, which Mrs. Mowbray hastily extended towards him, "with
the crime you have already committed, and seek not to peril your soul by
deeper guilt; be content with the plunder you now obtain, and depart;
for, by my holy calling, I affirm to you, that if you advance one
footstep towards the further molestation of these ladies, it shall be at
the hazard of your life."

"Bravo!" exclaimed Turpin. "Now this is what I like; who would have
thought the old autem-bawler had so much pluck in him? Sir, I commend
you for your courage, but you are mistaken. I am the quietest man
breathing, and never harm a human being; in proof of which, only look at
your rascal of a postilion, whom any one of my friends would have sent
post-haste to the devil for half the trouble he gave me. Easy as I am, I
never choose to be balked in my humors. I must have the fifty and the
buss, and then I'm off, as soon as you like; and I may as well have the
kiss while the old lady signs the check, and then we shall have the seal
as well as the signature. Poh--poh--no nonsense! Many a pretty lass has
thought it an honor to be kissed by Turpin."

Eleanor recoiled with deepest disgust, as she saw the highwayman thrust
aside the useless opposition of the priest, and approach her. He had
removed his mask; his face, flushed with insolent triumph, was turned
towards her. Despite the loathing, which curdled the blood within her
veins, she could not avert her eyes. He drew near her; she uttered a
shrill scream. At that moment a powerful grasp was laid upon Turpin's
shoulder; he turned and beheld Luke.

"Save me! save me," cried Eleanor, addressing the new comer.

"Damnation!" said the highwayman, "what has brought _you_ here? one
would think you were turned assistant to all distressed damsels. Quit
your hold, or, by the God above us, you will repent it."

"Fool!" exclaimed Luke, "talk thus to one who heeds you." And as he
spoke he hurled Turpin backwards with so much force that, staggering a
few yards, the highwayman fell to the ground.

The priest stood like one stunned with surprise at Luke's sudden
appearance and subsequent daring action.

Luke, meanwhile, approached Eleanor. He gazed upon her with curiosity
mixed with admiration, for his heart told him she was very fair. A
deathlike paleness had spread over her cheeks; yet still, despite the
want of color, she looked exquisitely beautiful, and her large blue eyes
eloquently thanked her deliverer for her rescue. The words she wanted
were supplied by Mrs. Mowbray, who thanked him in appropriate terms,
when they were interrupted by Turpin, who had by this time picked
himself up, and was drawing near them. His countenance wore a fierce
expression.

"I tell you what," said he, "Luke Bradley, or Luke Rookwood, or whatever
else you may call yourself, you have taken a damned unfair advantage of
me in this matter, and deserve nothing better at my hands than that I
should call you to instant account for it--and curse me, if I don't
too."

"Luke Bradley!" interrupted Mrs. Mowbray--"are you that individual?"

"I have been so called, madam," replied Luke.

"Father Ambrose, is this the person of whom you spoke?" eagerly asked
the lady.

"So I conclude," returned the priest, evasively.

"Did he not call you Luke Rookwood?" eagerly demanded Eleanor. "Is that
also your name?"

"Rookwood is my name, fair cousin," replied Luke, "if I may venture to
call you so."

"And Ranulph Rookwood is----"

"My brother."

"I never heard he had a brother," rejoined Eleanor, with some agitation.
"How can that be?"

"I am his brother, nevertheless," replied Luke, moodily--"his ELDER
BROTHER!"

Eleanor turned to her mother and the priest with a look of imploring
anguish; she saw a confirmation of the truth of this statement in their
glances. No contradiction was offered by either to his statement; both,
indeed, appeared in some mysterious manner prepared for it. This, then,
was the dreaded secret. This was the cause of her brother's sudden
departure. The truth flashed with lightning swiftness across her brain.

Chagrined and mortified, Luke remarked that glance of inquiry. His pride
was hurt at the preference thus naturally shown towards his brother. He
had been struck, deeply struck, with her beauty. He acknowledged the
truth of Peter's words. Eleanor's loveliness was without parallel. He
had seen naught so fair, and the instant he beheld her, he felt that for
_her_ alone could he cancel his vows to Sybil. The spirit of rivalry and
jealousy was instantly aroused by Eleanor's exclamations.

"His elder brother!" echoed Eleanor, dwelling upon his words, and
addressing Luke--"then you must be--but no, you are not, you cannot
be--it is Ranulph's title--it is not yours--you are not----"

"I am Sir Luke Rookwood," replied Luke, proudly.

Ere the words were uttered Eleanor had fainted.

"Assistance is at hand, madam, if you will accept it, and follow me,"
said Luke, raising the insensible girl in his arms, and bearing her down
the hill towards the encampment, whither he was followed by Mrs. Mowbray
and the priest, between whom, during the hurried dialogue we have
detailed, very significant glances had been exchanged. Turpin, who, as
it may be supposed, had not been an incurious observer of the scene
passing, burst into his usual loud laugh on seeing Luke bear away his
lovely burden.

"Cousin! Ha, ha!" said he. "So the wench is his cousin. Damme, I half
suspect he has fallen in love with his new-found cousin; and if so, Miss
Sybil, or I'm mistaken, will look as yellow as a guinea. If that little
Spanish devil gets it into her pretty jealous pate that he is about to
bring home a new mistress, we shall have a tragedy-scene in the
twinkling of a bed-post. However, I shan't lose sight of Sir Luke until
I have settled my accounts with him. Hark ye, boy," continued he,
addressing the postilion; "remain where you are; you won't be wanted yet
awhile, I imagine. There's a guinea for you, to drink Dick Turpin's
health."

Upon which he mounted his mare, and walked her easily down the hill.

"And so that be Dick Turpin, folks talk so much about," soliloquized the
lad, looking curiously after him; "well, he's as civil-speaking a chap
as need be, blow my boots if he ain't! and if I'd had a notion it were
he, I'd have pulled up at first call, without more ado. Nothing like
experience--I shall know better another time," added he, pocketing the
douceur.

Rushing swiftly down the hill, Luke tarried at the river's brink, to
sprinkle some of the cool element upon the pale brow of Eleanor. As he
held her in his arms, thoughts which he fain would have stifled in their
birth took possession of his heart. "Would she were mine!" murmured he.
"Yet no! the wish is unworthy." But that wish returned unbidden.

Eleanor opened her eyes. She was still too weak to walk without support,
and Luke, raising her once more in his arms, and motioning Mrs. Mowbray
to follow, crossed the brook by means of stepping-stones, and conducted
his charge along a bypath towards the priory, so as to avoid meeting
with the crew assembled upon the green.

They had gained one of the roofless halls, when he encountered
Balthazar. Astonished at the sight of the party, the patrico was about
to address the priest as an acquaintance, when his more orthodox brother
raised his finger to his lips, in token of caution. The action passed
unobserved.

"Hie thee to Sybil," said Luke to the patrico. "Bid her haste hither.
Say that this maiden--that Miss Mowbray is here, and requires her aid.
Fly! I will bear her to the refectory."

As Balthazar passed the priest, he pointed with a significant glance
towards a chasm in the wall, which seemed to be an opening to some
subterraneous chamber. The father again made a gesture of silence, and
Balthazar hastened upon his mission.

Luke led them to the refectory. He brought a chair for Eleanor's
support; but so far from reviving, after such attention as could be
afforded her, she appeared to become weaker. He was about to issue forth
in search of Sybil, when to his surprise he found the door fastened.

"You cannot pass this way," said a voice, which Luke instantly
recognized as that of the knight of Malta.

"Not pass!" echoed Luke. "What does this mean?"

"Our orders are from the queen," returned the knight.

At this instant the low tone of a muffled bell was heard.

"Ha!" exclaimed Luke; "some danger is at hand."

His heart smote him as he thought of Sybil, and he looked anxiously
towards Eleanor.

Balthazar rushed into the room.

"Where is Sybil?" cried Luke. "Will she not come?"

"She will be here anon," answered the patrico.

"I will seek her myself, then," said Luke. "The door by which you
entered is free."

"It is _not_ free," replied Balthazar. "Remain where you are."

"Who will prevent my going forth?" demanded Luke, sternly.

"I will," said Barbara Lovel, as she suddenly appeared in the doorway.
"You stir not, excepting at my pleasure. Where is the maiden?" continued
she, looking around with a grim smile of satisfaction at the
consternation produced by her appearance. "Ha! I see; she faints. Here
is a cordial that shall revive her. Mrs. Mowbray, you are welcome to the
gipsies' dwelling--you and your daughter. And you, Sir Luke Rookwood, I
congratulate you upon your accession of dignity." Turning to the priest,
who was evidently overwhelmed with confusion, she exclaimed, "And you
too, sir, think you I recognize you not? We have met ere this, at
Rookwood. Know you not Barbara Lovel? Ha, ha! It is long since my poor
dwelling has been so highly honored. But I must not delay the remedy.
Let her drink of this," said she, handing a phial to Mrs. Mowbray. "It
will instantly restore her."

"It is poison," cried Luke. "She shall not drink it."

"Poison!" reiterated Barbara. "Behold!" and she drank of the liquid. "I
would not poison your bride," added she, turning to Luke.

"My bride!" echoed Luke.

"Ay, your bride," repeated Barbara.

Luke recoiled in amazement. Mrs. Mowbray almost felt inclined to believe
she was a dreamer, so visionary did the whole scene appear. A dense
crowd of witnesses stood at the entrance. Foremost amongst them was the
sexton. Suddenly a shriek was heard, and the crowd opening to allow her
passage, Sybil rushed forward.