_SYBIL_

    The wiving vine, that round the friendly elm
    Twines her soft limbs, and weaves a leafy mantle
    For her supporting lover, dares not venture
    To mix her humble boughs with the embraces
    Of the more lofty cedar.

                                   GLAPTHORNE: _Albertus Wallenstein_.


Beneath a moldering wall, whither they had strayed, to be free from
interruption, and upon a carpet of the greenest moss, sat Sybil and her
lover.

With eager curiosity she listened to his tale. He recounted all that had
befallen him since his departure. He told her of the awful revelations
of the tomb; of the ring that, like a talisman, had conjured up a
thousand brilliant prospects; of his subsequent perils; his escapes; his
rencontre with Lady Rookwood; his visit to his father's body; and his
meeting with his brother. All this she heard with a cheek now flushed
with expectation, now made pale with apprehension; with palpitating
bosom, and suppressed breath. But when taking a softer tone, love,
affection, happiness inspired the theme, and Luke sought to paint the
bliss that should be theirs in his new estate; when he would throw his
fortune into her lap, his titles at her feet, and bid her wear them with
him; when, with ennobled hand and unchanged heart, he would fulfil the
troth plighted in his outcast days; in lieu of tender, grateful
acquiescence, the features of Sybil became overcast, the soft smile
faded away, and, as spring sunshine is succeeded by the sudden shower,
the light that dwelt in her sunny orbs grew dim with tears.

"Why--why is this, dear Sybil?" said Luke, gazing upon her in
astonishment, not unmingled with displeasure. "To what am I to attribute
these tears? You do not, surely, regret my good fortune?"

"Not on your own account, dear Luke," returned she, sadly. "The tears I
shed were for myself--the first, the only tears that I have ever shed
for such cause; and," added she, raising her head like a flower
surcharged with moisture, "they shall be the last."

"This is inexplicable, dear Sybil. Why should you lament for yourself,
if not for me? Does not the sunshine of prosperity that now shines upon
me gild you with the same beam? Did I not even now affirm that the day
that saw me enter the hall of my forefathers should dawn upon our
espousals?"

"True; but the sun that shines upon you, to me wears a threatening
aspect. The day of those espousals will never dawn. You cannot make me
the Lady of Rookwood."

"What do I hear?" exclaimed Luke, surprised at this avowal of his
mistress, sadly and deliberately delivered. "Not wed you! And wherefore
not? Is it the rank I have acquired, or hope to acquire, that displeases
you? Speak, that I may waste no further time in thus pursuing the
shadows of happiness, while the reality fleets from me."

"And _are_ they shadows; and _is_ this the reality, dear Luke? Question
your secret soul, and you will find it otherwise. You could not forego
your triumph; it is not likely. You have dwelt too much upon the proud
title which will be yours to yield it to another, when it may be won so
easily. And, above all, when your mother's reputation, and your own
stained name, may be cleared by one word, breathed aloud, would you fail
to utter it? No, dear Luke, I read your heart; you would not."

"And if I could _not_ forego this, wherefore is it that you refuse to be
a sharer in my triumph? Why will you render my honors valueless when I
have acquired them? You love me not."

"Not love you, Luke?"

"Approve it, then."

"I do approve it. Bear witness the sacrifice I am about to make of all
my hopes, at the shrine of my idolatry to you. Bear witness the agony of
this hour. Bear witness the horror of the avowal, that I never can be
yours. As Luke Bradley, I would joyfully--oh, how joyfully!--have been
your bride. As Sir Luke Rookwood"--and she shuddered as she pronounced
the name--"I never can be so."

"Then, by Heaven! Luke Bradley will I remain. But wherefore--wherefore
not as Sir Luke Rookwood?"

"Because," replied Sybil, with reluctance--"because I am no longer your
equal. The gipsy's low-born daughter is no mate for Sir Luke Rookwood.
Love cannot blind me, dear Luke. It cannot make me other than I am; it
cannot exalt me in my own esteem, nor in that of the world, with which
you, alas! too soon will mingle, and which will regard even me as--no
matter what!--it shall not scorn me as your bride. I will not bring
shame and reproach upon you. Oh! if for me, dear Luke, the proud ones of
the earth were to treat you with contumely, this heart would break with
agony. For myself, I have pride sufficient--perchance too much.
Perchance 'tis pride that actuates me now. I know not. But for you I am
all weakness. As you were heretofore, I would have been to you the
tenderest and truest wife that ever breathed; as you are now----"

"Hear me, Sybil."

"Hear _me_ out, dear Luke. One other motive there is that determines my
present conduct, which, were all else surmounted, would in itself
suffice. Ask me not what that is. I cannot explain it. For your own
sake; I implore you, be satisfied with my refusal."

"What a destiny is mine!" exclaimed Luke, striking his forehead with his
clenched hand. "No choice is left me. Either way I destroy my own
happiness. On the one hand stands love--on the other, ambition; yet
neither will conjoin."

"Pursue, then, ambition," said Sybil, energetically, "if you _can_
hesitate. Forget that I have ever existed; forget you have ever loved;
forget that such a passion dwells within the human heart, and you may
still be happy, though you are great."

"And do you deem," replied Luke, with frantic impatience, "that I _can_
accomplish this; that I _can_ forget that I have loved you; that I _can_
forget you? Cost what it will, the effort shall be made. Yet by our
former love, I charge you tell me what has wrought this change in you!
Why do you _now_ refuse me?"

"I have said you are Sir Luke Rookwood," returned Sybil, with painful
emotion. "Does that name import nothing?"

"Imports it aught of ill?"

"To me, everything of ill. It is a fated house. Its line are all
predestined."

"To what?" demanded Luke.

"To _murder_!" replied Sybil, with solemn emphasis. "To the murder of
their wives. Forgive me, Luke, if I have dared to utter this. Yourself
compelled me to it."

Amazement, horror, wrath, kept Luke silent for a few moments. Starting
to his feet, he cried:

"And can you suspect me of a crime so foul? Think you, because I shall
assume the name, that I shall put on the nature likewise of my race? Do
you believe me capable of aught so horrible?"

"Oh, no, I believe it not. I am sure you would not do it. Your soul
would reject with horror such a deed. But if Fate should guide your
hand, if the avenging spirit of your murdered ancestress should point to
the steel, you could not shun it then."

"In Heaven's name! to what do you allude?"

"To a tradition of your house," replied Sybil. "Listen to me, and you
shall hear the legend." And with a pathos that produced a thrilling
effect upon Luke, she sang the following ballad:

    THE LEGEND OF THE LADY OF ROOKWOOD

    Grim Ranulph home hath at midnight come, from the long wars of the
              Roses,
    And the squire, who waits at his ancient gates, a secret dark
              discloses;
    To that varlet's words no response accords his lord, but his visage
              stern
    Grows ghastly white in the wan moonlight, and his eyes like the lean
              wolf's burn.

    To his lady's bower, at that lonesome hour, unannounced, is Sir
              Ranulph gone;
    Through the dim corridor, through the hidden door, he glides--she is
              all alone!
    Full of holy zeal doth his young dame kneel at the meek Madonna's feet,
    Her hands are pressed on her gentle breast, and upturned is her aspect
              sweet.

    Beats Ranulph's heart with a joyful start, as he looks on her
              guiltless face;
    And the raging fire of his jealous ire is subdued by the words of
              grace;
    His own name shares her murmured prayers--more freely can he breathe;
    But ah! that look! Why doth he pluck his poniard from its sheath?

    On a footstool thrown, lies a costly gown of saye and of minevere
    --A mantle fair for the dainty wear of a migniard cavalier,--
    And on it flung, to a bracelet hung, a picture meets his eye;
    "By my father's head!" grim Ranulph said, "false wife, thy end draws
              nigh."

    From off its chain hath the fierce knight ta'en that fond and fatal
              pledge;
    His dark eyes blaze, no word he says, thrice gleams his dagger's edge!
    Her blood it drinks, and, as she sinks, his victim hears his cry:
    "For kiss impure of paramour, adult'ress, dost thou die!"

    Silent he stood, with hands embrued in gore, and glance of flame,
    As thus her plaint, in accents faint, made his ill-fated dame:
    "Kind Heaven can tell, that all too well, I've loved thee, cruel lord;
    But now with hate commensurate, assassin, thou'rt abhorred.

    "I've loved thee long, through doubt and wrong; I've loved thee and
              no other;
    And my love was pure for my paramour, for alas! he was my brother!
    The Red, Red Rose, on _thy_ banner glows, on _his_ pennon gleams the
              White,
    And the bitter feud, that ye both have rued, forbids ye to unite.

    "My bower he sought, what time he thought thy jealous vassals slept,
    Of joy we dreamed, and never deemed that watch those vassals kept;
    An hour flew by, too speedily!--that picture was his boon:
    Ah! little thrift to me that gift: he left me all too soon!

    "Wo worth the hour! dark fates did lower, when our hands were first
              united,
    For my heart's firm truth, 'mid tears and ruth, with death hast thou
              requited:
    In prayer sincere, full many a year of my wretched life I've spent;
    But to hell's control would I give my soul to work thy chastisement!"

    These wild words said, low drooped her head, and Ranulph's
              life-blood froze,
    For the earth did gape, as an awful shape from out its depths arose:
    "Thy prayer is heard, Hell hath concurred," cried the fiend, "thy
              soul is mine!
    Like fate may dread each dame shall wed with Ranulph or his line!"

    Within the tomb to await her doom is that hapless lady sleeping,
    And another bride by Ranulph's side through the livelong night is
              weeping.
    _This_ dame declines--a third repines, and fades, like the rest, away;
    Her lot she rues, whom a Rookwood woos--_cursed is her Wedding Day_!

"And this is the legend of my ancestress?" said Luke, as Sybil's strains
were ended.

"It is," replied she.

"An idle tale," observed Luke, moodily.

"Not so," answered Sybil. "Has not the curse of blood clung to all your
line? Has it not attached to your father--to Sir Reginald--Sir
Ralph--Sir Ranulph--to all? Which of them has escaped it? And when I
tell you this, dear Luke; when I find you bear the name of this accursed
race, can you wonder if I shudder at adding to the list of the victims
of that ruthless spirit, and that I tremble for you? I would die _for_
you willingly--but not by your hand. I would not that my blood, which I
would now pour out for you as freely as water, should rise up in
judgment against you. For myself I have no tears--for _you_, a thousand.
My mother, upon her death-bed, told me I should never be yours. I
believed her not, for I was happy then. She said that we never should be
united; or, if united----?"

"What, in Heaven's name?"

"That you would be my destroyer. How could I credit her words then? How
can I doubt them now, when I find you are a Rookwood? And think not,
dear Luke, that I am ruled by selfish fears in this resolution. To
renounce you may cost me my life; but the deed will be my own. You may
call me superstitious, credulous: I have been nurtured in credulity. It
is the faith of my fathers. There are those, methinks, who have an
insight into futurity; and such boding words have been spoken, that, be
they true or false, I will not risk their fulfilment in my person. I may
be credulous; I may be weak; I may be erring; but I am steadfast in
this. Bid me perish at your feet, and I will do it. I will not be your
Fate. I will not be the wretched instrument of your perdition. I will
love, worship, watch, serve, perish for you--but I'll not wed you."

Exhausted by the vehemence of her emotion, she would have sunk upon the
ground, had not Luke caught her in his arms. Pressing her to his bosom,
he renewed his passionate protestations. Every argument was unavailing.
Sybil appeared inflexible.

"You love me as you have ever loved me?" said she, at length.

"A thousand-fold more fervently," replied Luke; "put it to the test."

"How if I dare to do so? Consider well: I may ask too much."

"Name it. If it be not to surrender you, by my mother's body I will obey
you."

"I would propose an oath."

"Ha!"

"A solemn, binding oath, that; if you wed me not, you will not wed
another. Ha! do you start? Have I appalled you?"

"I start? I will take it. Hear me--by----"

"Hold!" exclaimed a voice behind them. "Do not forswear yourself." And
immediately afterwards the sexton made his appearance. There was a
malignant smile upon his countenance. The lovers started at the ominous
interruption.

"Begone!" cried Luke.

"Take not that oath," said Peter, "and I leave you. Remember the counsel
I gave you on our way hither."

"What counsel did he give you, Luke?" inquired Sybil, eagerly, of her
lover.

"We spoke of you, fond girl," replied Peter. "I cautioned him against
the match. I knew not your sentiments, or I had spared myself the
trouble. You have judged wisely. Were he to wed you, ill would come of
it. But he _must_ wed another."

"MUST!" cried Sybil, her eyes absolutely emitting sparkles of
indignation from their night-like depths; and, unsheathing as she spoke
the short poniard which she wore at her girdle, she rushed towards
Peter, raising her hand to strike.

"_Must_ wed another! And dare you counsel this?"

"Put up your dagger, fair maiden," said Peter, calmly. "Had I been
younger, your eyes might have had more terrors for me than your weapon;
as it is, I am proof against both. You would not strike an old man like
myself, and of your lover's kin?"

Sybil's uplifted hand fell to her side.

"'Tis true," continued the sexton, "I dared to give him this advice; and
when you have heard me out, you will not, I am persuaded, think me so
unreasonable as, at first, I may appear to be. I have been an unseen
listener to your converse; not that I desire to pry into your
secrets--far from it; I overheard you by accident. I applaud your
resolution; but if you are inclined to sacrifice all for your lover's
weal, do not let the work be incomplete. Bind him not by oaths which he
will regard as spiders' webs, to be burst through at pleasure. You see,
as well as I do, that he is bent on being lord of Rookwood; and, in
truth, to an aspiring mind, such a desire is natural, is praiseworthy.
It will be pleasant, as well as honorable, to efface the stain cast upon
his birth. It will be an act of filial duty in him to restore his
mother's good name; and I, her father, laud his anxiety on that score;
though, to speak truth, fair maid, I am not so rigid as your nice
moralists in my view of human nature, and can allow a latitude to love
which their nicer scruples will not admit. It will be a proud thing to
triumph over his implacable foe; and this he may accomplish----"

"Without marriage," interrupted Sybil, angrily.

"True," returned Peter; "yet not maintain it. May win it, but not wear
it. You have said truly, the house of Rookwood is a fated house; and it
hath been said likewise, that if he wed not one of his own kindred--that
if Rook mate not with Rook, his possessions shall pass away from his
hands. Listen to this prophetic quatrain:

    When the stray Rook shall perch on the topmost bough,
    There shall be clamor and screeching, I trow;
    But of right to, and rule of the ancient nest,
    The Rook that with Rook mates shall hold him possest.

You hear what these quaint rhymes say. Luke is, doubtless, the stray
rook, and a fledgeling hath flown hither from a distant country. He must
take her to his mate, or relinquish her and 'the ancient nest' to his
brother. For my own part, I disregard such sayings. I have little faith
in prophecy and divination. I know not what Eleanor Mowbray, for so she
is called, can have to do with the tenure of the estates of Rookwood.
But if Luke Rookwood, after he has lorded it for awhile in splendor, be
cast forth again in rags and wretchedness, let him not blame his
grandsire for his own want of caution."

"Luke, I implore you, tell me," said Sybil, who had listened,
horror-stricken, to the sexton, shuddering, as it were, beneath the
chilly influence of his malevolent glance, "is this true? Does your fate
depend upon Eleanor Mowbray? Who is she? What has she to do with
Rookwood? Have you seen her? Do you love her?"

"I have never seen her," replied Luke.

"Thank Heaven for that!" cried Sybil. "Then you love her not?"

"How were that possible?" returned Luke. "Do I not say I have not seen
her?"

"Who is she, then?"

"This old man tells me she is my cousin. She is betrothed to my brother
Ranulph."

"How?" ejaculated Sybil. "And would you snatch his betrothed from your
brother's arms? Would you do him this grievous wrong? Is it not enough
that you must wrest from him that which he has long deemed his own? And
if he has falsely deemed it so, it will not make his loss the less
bitter. If you do thus wrong your brother, do not look for happiness; do
not look for respect; for neither will be your portion. Even this
stony-hearted old man shrinks aghast at such a deed. His snake-like eyes
are buried on the ground. See, I have moved even _him_."

And in truth Peter did appear, for an instant, strangely moved.

"'Tis nothing," returned he, mastering his emotion by a strong effort.
"What is all this to me? I never had a brother. I never had aught--wife,
child, or relative, that loved me. And I love not the world, nor the
things of the world, nor those that inhabit the world. But I know what
sways the world and its inhabitants; and that is, SELF! AND
SELF-INTEREST! Let Luke reflect on this. The key to Rookwood is Eleanor
Mowbray. The hand that grasps hers, grasps those lands; thus saith the
prophecy."

"It is a lying prophecy."

"It was uttered by one of your race."

"By whom?"

"By Barbara Lovel," said Peter, with a sneer of triumph.

"Ha!"

"Heed him not," exclaimed Luke, as Sybil recoiled at this intelligence.
"I am yours."

"Not mine! not mine!" shrieked she; "but, oh! not _hers_!"

"Whither go you?" cried Luke, as Sybil, half bewildered, tore herself
from him.

"To Barbara Lovel."

"I will go with you."

"No! let me go alone. I have much to ask her; yet tarry not with this
old man, dear Luke, or close your ears to his crafty talk. Avoid him.
Oh, I am sick at heart. Follow me not; I implore you, follow me not."

And with distracted air she darted amongst the mouldering cloisters,
leaving Luke stupefied with anguish and surprise. The sexton maintained
a stern and stoical composure.

"She is a woman, after all," muttered he; "all her high-flown resolves
melt like snow in the sunshine at the thought of a rival. I congratulate
you, grandson Luke; you are free from your fetters."

"Free!" echoed Luke. "Quit my sight; I loathe to look upon you. You have
broken the truest heart that ever beat in woman's bosom."

"Tut, tut," returned Peter; "it is not broken yet. Wait till we hear
what old Barbara has got to say; and, meanwhile, we must arrange with
Dick Turpin the price of that certificate. The knave knows its value
well. Come, be a man. This is worse than womanish."

And at length he succeeded, half by force and half by persuasion, in
dragging Luke away with him.