_AN ENGLISH ADVENTURER_

    _Mrs. Peachem._ Sure the captain's the finest gentleman on the road.

                                                     _Beggar's Opera._


Jack Palmer was a good-humored, good-looking man, with immense bushy,
red whiskers, a freckled, florid complexion, and sandy hair, rather
inclined to scantiness towards the scalp of the head, which garnished
the nape of his neck with a ruff of crisp little curls, like the ring on
a monk's shaven crown. Notwithstanding this tendency to baldness, Jack
could not be more than thirty, though his looks were some five years in
advance. His face was one of those inexplicable countenances, which
appear to be proper to a peculiar class of men--a regular Newmarket
physiognomy--compounded chiefly of cunning and assurance; not low
cunning, nor vulgar assurance, but crafty sporting subtlety, careless as
to results, indifferent to obstacles, ever on the alert for the main
chance, game and turf all over, eager, yet easy, keen, yet quiet. He was
somewhat showily dressed, in such wise that he looked half like a fine
gentleman of that day, half like a jockey of our own. His nether man
appeared in well-fitting, well-worn buckskins, and boots with tops, not
unconscious of the saddle; while the airy extravagance of his
broad-skirted, sky-blue riding coat, the richness of his vest--the
pockets of which were beautifully exuberant, according to the mode of
1737--the smart luxuriance of his cravat, and a certain curious taste in
the size and style of his buttons, proclaimed that, in his own esteem at
least, his person did not appear altogether unworthy of decoration; nor,
in justice to Jack, can we allow that he was in error. He was a model
of a man for five feet ten; square, compact, capitally built in every
particular, excepting that his legs were slightly imbowed, which defect
probably arose from his being almost constantly on horseback; a sort of
exercise in which Jack greatly delighted, and was accounted a superb
rider. It was, indeed, his daring horsemanship, upon one particular
occasion, when he had outstripped a whole field, that had procured him
the honor of an invitation to Rookwood. Who he was, or whence he came,
was a question not easily answered--Jack, himself, evading all solution
to the inquiry. Sir Piers never troubled his head about the matter: he
was a "deuced good fellow--rode well, and stood on no sort of ceremony;"
that was enough for him. Nobody else knew anything about him, save that
he was a capital judge of horseflesh, kept a famous black mare, and
attended every hunt in the West Riding--that he could sing a good song,
was a choice companion, and could drink three bottles without feeling
the worse for them.

Sensible of the indecorum that might attach to his appearance, Dr. Small
had hastily laid down his pipe, and arranged his wig. But when he saw
who was the intruder, with a grunt of defiance he resumed his
occupation, without returning the bow of the latter, or bestowing
further notice upon him. Nothing discomposed at the churchman's
displeasure, Jack greeted Titus cordially, and carelessly saluting Mr.
Coates, threw himself into a chair. He next filled a tumbler of claret,
and drained it at a draught.

"Have you ridden far, Jack?" asked Titus, noticing the dusty state of
Palmer's azure attire.

"Some dozen miles," replied Palmer; "and that, on such a sultry
afternoon as the present, makes one feel thirstyish. I'm as dry as a
sandbed. Famous wine this--beautiful tipple--better than all your red
fustian. Ah, how poor Sir Piers used to like it! Well, that's all
over--a glass like this might do him good in his present quarters! I'm
afraid I'm intruding. But the fact is, I wanted a little information
about the order of the procession, and missing you below, came hither in
search of you. You're to be chief mourner, I suppose, Titus--_rehearsing_
your part, eh?"

"Come, come, Jack, no joking," replied Titus; "the subject's too
serious. I am to be chief mourner--and I expect you to be a mourner--and
everybody else to be mourners. We must all mourn at the proper time.
There'll be a power of people at the church."

"There _are_ a power of people here already," returned Jack, "if they
all attend."

"And they all _will_ attend, or what is the eating and drinking to go
for? I sha'n't leave a soul in the house."

"Excepting one," said Jack, archly. "Lady Rookwood won't attend, I
think."

"Ay, excepting her ladyship and her ladyship's abigail. All the rest go
with me, and form part of the procession. You go too."

"Of course. At what time do you start?"

"Twelve precisely. As the clock strikes, we set out--all in a line, and
a long line we'll make. I'm waiting for that ould coffin-faced rascal,
Peter Bradley, to arrange the order."

"How long will it all occupy, think you?" asked Jack, carelessly.

"That I can't say," returned Titus; "possibly an hour, more or less. But
we shall start to the minute--that is, if we can get all together, so
don't be out of the way. And hark ye, Jack, you must contrive to change
your toggery. That sky-blue coat won't do. It's not the thing at all, at
all."

"Never fear that," replied Palmer. "But who were those in the
carriages?"

"Is it the last carriage you mean? Squire Forester and his sons. They're
dining with the other gentlefolk, in the great room up-stairs, to be out
of the way. Oh, we'll have a grand _berrin'_. And, by St. Patrick! I
must be looking after it."

"Stay a minute," said Jack; "let's have a cool bottle first. They are
all taking care of themselves below, and Peter Bradley has not made his
appearance, so you need be in no hurry. I'll go with you presently.
Shall I ring for the claret?"

"By all means," replied Titus.

Jack accordingly arose; and a butler answering the summons, a
long-necked bottle was soon placed before them.

"You heard of the affray last night, I presume?" said Jack, renewing the
conversation.

"With the poachers? To be sure I did. Wasn't I called in to examine Hugh
Badger's wounds the first thing this morning; and a deep cut there was,
just over the eye, besides other bruises."

"Is the wound dangerous?" inquired Palmer.

"Not exactly mortal, if you mean that," replied the Irishman;
"dangerous, certainly."

"Humph!" exclaimed Jack; "they'd a pretty hardish bout of it, I
understand. Anything been heard of the body?"

"What body?" inquired Small, who was half-dozing.

"The body of the drowned poacher," replied Jack; "they were off to
search for it this morning."

"Found it--not they!" exclaimed Titus. "Ha, ha!--I can't help laughing,
for the life and _sowl_ of me; a capital trick he played
'em,--capital--ha, ha! What do you think the fellow did? Ha, ha!--after
leading 'em the devil's dance, all around the park, killing a hound as
savage as a wolf, and breaking Hugh Badger's head, which is as hard and
thick as a butcher's block, what does the fellow do but dive into a
pool, with a great rock hanging over it, and make his way to the other
side, through a subterranean cavern, which nobody knew anything about,
till they came to drag it, thinking him snugly drowned all the
while--ha, ha!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" chorused Jack; "bravo! he's a lad of the right sort--ha,
ha!"

"He! who?" inquired the attorney.

"Why, the poacher, to be sure," replied Jack; "who else were we talking
about?"

"Beg pardon," returned Coates; "I thought you might have heard some
intelligence. We've got an eye upon him. We know who it was."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Jack; "and who was it?"

"A fellow known by the name of Luke Bradley."

"Zounds!" cried Titus, "you don't say it was he? Murder in Irish! that
bates everything; why, he was Sir Piers's----"

"Natural son," replied the attorney; "he has not been heard of for some
time--shockingly incorrigible rascal--impossible to do anything with
him."

"You don't say so?" observed Jack. "I've heard Sir Piers speak of the
lad; and, by his account, he's as fine a fellow as ever crossed tit's
back; only a little wildish and unreasonable, as the best of us may be;
wants breaking, that's all. Your skittish colt makes the best horse, and
so would he. To speak the truth, I'm glad he escaped."

"So am I," rejoined Titus; "for, in the first place, I've a foolish
partiality for poachers, and am sorry when any of 'em come to hurt; and,
in the second, I'd be mighty displeased if any ill had happened to one
of Sir Piers's flesh and blood, as this young chap appears to be."

"Appears to be!" repeated Palmer; "there's no _appearing_ in the case, I
take it. This Bradley's an undoubted offshoot of the old squire. His
mother was a servant-maid at the hall, I rather think. You sir,"
continued he, addressing Coates, "perhaps, can inform us of the real
facts of the case."

"She was something better than a servant," replied the attorney, with a
slight cough and a knowing wink. "I remember her quite well, though I
was but a boy then; a lovely creature, and so taking, I don't wonder
that Sir Piers was smitten with her. He was mad after the women in those
days, and pretty Sue Bradley above all others. She lived with him quite
like his lady."

"So I've heard," returned Jack; "and she remained with him till her
death. Let me see, wasn't there something rather odd in the way in which
she died, rather suddenish and unexpected,--a noise made about it at the
time, eh?"

"Not that I ever heard," replied Coates, shaking his head, and appearing
to be afflicted with an instantaneous ignorance; while Titus affected
not to hear the remark, but occupied himself with his wine-glass. Small
snored audibly. "I was too young, then, to pay any attention to idle
rumors," continued Coates. "It's a long time ago. May I ask the reason
of your inquiry?"

"Nothing further than simple curiosity," replied Jack, enjoying the
consternation of his companions. "It is, as you say, a long while since.
But it's singular how that sort of thing is remembered. One would think
people had something else to do than talk of one's private affairs for
ever. For my part, I despise such tattle. But there _are_ persons in the
neighborhood who still say it was an awkward business. Amongst others,
I've heard that this very Luke Bradley talks in pretty plain terms about
it."

"Does he, indeed?" said Coates. "So much the worse for him. Let me once
lay hands upon him, and I'll put a gag in his mouth that shall spoil his
talking in the future."

"That's precisely the point I desire to arrive at," replied Jack; "and I
advise you by all means to accomplish that, for the sake of the family.
Nobody likes his friends to be talked about. So I'd settle the matter
amicably, were I you. Just let the fellow go his way; he won't return
here again in a hurry, I'll be bound. As to clapping him in quod, he
might prattle--turn stag."

"Turn stag!" replied Coates, "what the deuce is that? In my opinion, he
has 'turned stag' already. At all events, he'll pay _deer_ for his
night's sport, you may depend upon it. What signifies it what _he_ says?
Let me lay hands upon him, that's all."

"Well, well," said Jack, "no offence. I only meant to offer a
suggestion. I thought the family, young Sir Ranulph, I mean, mightn't
like the story to be revived. As to Lady Rookwood, she don't, I suppose,
care much about idle reports. Indeed, if I've been rightly informed, she
bears this youngster no particular good-will to begin with, and has
tried hard to get him out of the country. But, as you say, what _does_
it signify what he says? he can _only_ talk. Sir Piers is dead and
gone."

"Humph!" muttered Coates, peevishly.

"But it does seem a little hard, that a lad should swing for killing a
bit of venison in his own father's park."

"Which he'd a _nat'ral_ right to do," cried Titus.

"He had no natural right to bruise, violently assault, and endanger the
life of his father's, or anybody else's gamekeeper," retorted Coates. "I
tell you, sir, he's committed a capital offence, and if he's taken----"

"No chance of that, I hope," interrupted Jack.

"That's a wish I can't help wishing myself," said Titus: "on my
conscience, these poachers are fine boys, when all's said and done."

"The finest of all boys," exclaimed Jack, with a kindred enthusiasm,
"are those birds of the night, and minions of the moon, whom we call,
most unjustly, poachers. They are, after all, only _professional
sportsmen_, making a business of what we make a pleasure; a nightly
pursuit of what is to us a daily relaxation; there's the main
distinction. As to the rest, it's all in idea; they merely thin an
overstocked park, as _you_ would reduce a plethoric patient, doctor; or
as _you_ would work a moneyed client, if you got him into Chancery,
Mister Attorney. And then how much more scientifically and
systematically they set to work than we amateurs do! how noiselessly
they bag a hare, smoke a pheasant, or knock a buck down with an air-gun!
how independent are they of any license, except that of a good eye, and
a swift pair of legs! how unnecessary is it for them to ask permission
to shoot over Mr. So-and-so's grounds, or my Lord That's preserves!
they are free of every cover, and indifferent to any alteration in the
game laws. I've some thoughts, when everything else fails, of taking to
poaching myself. In my opinion, a poacher's a highly respectable
character. What say you, Mr. Coates?" turning very gravely to that
gentleman.

"Such a question, sir," replied Coates, bridling up, "scarcely deserves
a serious answer. I make no doubt you will next maintain that a
highwayman is a gentleman."

"Most undoubtedly," replied Palmer, in the same grave tone, which might
have passed for banter, had Jack ever bantered. "I'll maintain and prove
it. I don't see how he can be otherwise. It is as necessary for a man to
be a gentleman before he can turn highwayman, as it is for a doctor to
have his diploma, or an attorney his certificate. Some of the finest
gentlemen of their day, as Captain Lovelace, Hind, Hannum, and Dudley,
were eminent on the road, and they set the fashion. Ever since their day
a real highwayman would consider himself disgraced, if he did not
conduct himself in every way like a gentleman. Of course, there are
pretenders in this line, as in everything else. But these are only
exceptions, and prove the rule. What are the distinguishing
characteristics of a fine gentleman?--perfect knowledge of the
world--perfect independence of character--notoriety--command of
cash--and inordinate success with the women. You grant all these
premises? First, then, it is part of a highwayman's business to be
thoroughly acquainted with the world. He is the easiest and pleasantest
fellow going. There is Tom King, for example: he is the handsomest man
about town, and the best-bred fellow on the road. Then whose
inclinations are so uncontrolled as the highwayman's, so long as the
mopuses last? who produces so great an effect by so few words?--'STAND
AND DELIVER!' is sure to arrest attention. Every one is captivated by an
address so _taking_. As to money, he wins a purse of a hundred guineas
as easily as you would the same sum from the faro table. And wherein
lies the difference? only in the name of the game. Who so little need
of a banker as he? all he has to apprehend is a check--all he has to
draw is a trigger. As to the women, they dote upon him: not even your
red-coat is so successful. Look at a highwayman mounted on his flying
steed, with his pistols in his holsters, and his mask upon his face.
What can be a more gallant sight? The clatter of his horse's heels is
like music to his ear--he is in full quest--he shouts to the fugitive
horseman to stay--the other flies all the faster--what chase can be half
so exciting as that? Suppose he overtakes his prey, which ten to one he
will, how readily his summons to deliver is obeyed! how satisfactory is
the appropriation of a lusty purse or corpulent pocket-book!--getting
the brush is nothing to it. How tranquilly he departs, takes off his hat
to his accommodating acquaintance, wishes him a pleasant journey, and
disappears across the heath! England, sir, has reason to be proud of her
highwaymen. They are peculiar to her clime, and are as much before the
brigand of Italy, the contrabandist of Spain, or the cut-purse of
France--as her sailors are before all the rest of the world. The day
will never come, I hope, when we shall degenerate into the footpad, and
lose our _Night Errantry_. Even the French borrow from us--they have
only one highwayman of eminence, and he learnt and practised his art in
England."

"And who was he, may I ask?" said Coates.

"Claude Du-Val," replied Jack; "and though a Frenchman, he was a deuced
fine fellow in his day--quite a tip-top macaroni--he could skip and
twirl like a figurant, warble like an opera-singer, and play the
flageolet better than any man of his day--he always carried a lute in
his pocket, along with his snappers. And then his dress--it was quite
beautiful to see how smartly he was rigg'd out, all velvet and lace; and
even with his vizard on his face, the ladies used to cry out to see him.
Then he took a purse with the air and grace of a receiver-general. All
the women adored him--and that, bless their pretty faces! was the best
proof of his gentility. I wish he'd not been a Mounseer. The women
never mistake. _They_ can always discover the true gentlemen, and they
were all, of every degree, from the countess to the kitchen-maid, over
head and ears in love with him."

"But he was taken, I suppose?" asked Coates.

"Ay," responded Jack, "the women were his undoing, as they've been many
a brave fellow's before, and will be again." Touched by which
reflection, Jack became for once in his life sentimental, and sighed.
"Poor Du-Val! he was seized at the Hole-in-the-Wall in Chandos-street by
the bailiff of Westminster, when dead drunk, his liquor having been
drugged by his dells--and was shortly afterwards hanged at Tyburn."

"It was thousand pities," said Mr. Coates, with a sneer, "that so fine a
gentleman should come to so ignominious an end!"

"Quite the contrary," returned Jack. "As his biographer, Doctor Pope,
properly remarks, 'Who is there worthy of the name of man, that would
not prefer such a death before a mean, solitary, inglorious life?'
By-the-by, Titus, as we're upon the subject, if you like I'll sing you a
song about highwaymen."

"I should like it of all things," replied Titus, who entertained a very
favorable opinion of Jack's vocal powers, and was by no means an
indifferent performer; "only let it be in a minor key."

Jack required no further encouragement, but disregarding the hints and
looks of Coates, sang with much unction the following ballad to a good
old tune, then very popular--the merit of which "nobody can deny."

    A CHAPTER OF HIGHWAYMEN

    Of every rascal of every kind,
    The most notorious to my mind,
    Was the Cavalier Captain, gay JEMMY HIND![7]
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

    But the pleasantest coxcomb among them all
    For lute, coranto, and madrigal,
    Was the galliard Frenchman, CLAUDE DU-VAL![8]
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

    And Tobygloak never a coach could rob,
    Could lighten a pocket, or empty a fob,
    With a neater hand than OLD MOB, OLD MOB![9]
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

    Nor did housebreaker ever deal harder knocks
    On the stubborn lid of a good strong box,
    Than that prince of good fellows, TOM COX, TOM COX![10]
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

    A blither fellow on broad highway,
    Did never with oath bid traveller stay,
    Than devil-may-care WILL HOLLOWAY![11]
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

    And in roguery naught could exceed the tricks
    Of GETTINGS and GREY, and the five or six
    Who trod in the steps of bold NEDDY WICKS![12]
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

    Nor could any so handily break a lock
    As SHEPPARD, who stood on the Newgate dock,
    And nicknamed the jailers around him "_his flock_!"[13]
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

    Nor did highwaymen ever before possess
    For ease, for security, danger, distress,
    Such a mare as DICK TURPIN'S Black Bess! Black Bess!
                                        _Which nobody can deny._

"A capital song, by the powers!" cried Titus, as Jack's ditty came to a
close. "But your English robbers are nothing at all, compared with our
Tories[14] and Rapparees--nothing at all. They were the _raal_
gentlemen--they were the boys to cut a throat _aisily_."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed Jack, in disgust, "the gentlemen I speak of never
maltreated any one, except in self-defence."

"Maybe not," replied Titus; "I'll not dispute the point--but these
Rapparees were true brothers of the blade, and gentlemen every inch.
I'll just sing you a song I made about them myself. But meanwhile don't
let's forget the bottle--talking's dry work. My service to you, doctor!"
added he, winking at the somnolent Small. And tossing off his glass,
Titus delivered himself with much joviality of the following ballad; the
words of which he adapted to the tune of the _Groves of the Pool_:

    THE RAPPAREES

    Let the Englishman boast of his Turpins and Sheppards, as cocks of
              the walk,
    His Mulsacks, and Cheneys, and Swiftnecks[15]--it's all botheration
              and talk;
    Compared with the robbers of Ireland, they don't come within half a
              mile,
    There never were yet any rascals like those of my own native isle!

    First and foremost comes REDMOND O'HANLON, allowed the first thief
              of the world,[16]
    That o'er the broad province of Ulster the Rapparee banner unfurled;
    Och! he was an elegant fellow, as ever you saw in your life,
    At fingering the blunderbuss trigger, or handling the throat-cutting
              knife.

    And then such a dare-devil squadron as that which composed REDMOND'S
              _tail_!
    Meel, Mactigh, Jack Reilly, Shan Bernagh, Phil Galloge, and Arthur
              O'Neal;
    _Shure_ never were any boys like 'em for rows, _agitations_, and
              sprees,
    Not a _rap_ did they leave in the country, and hence they were
              called _Rap_parees.[17]

    Next comes POWER, the great Tory[18] of Munster, a gentleman born
              every inch,
    And strong JACK MACPHERSON of Leinster, a horse-shoe who broke at a
              pinch;
    The last was a fellow so _lively_, not death e'en his courage could
              damp,
    For as he was led to the gallows, he played his own "march to the
              camp."[19]

    PADDY FLEMING, DICK BALF, and MULHONI, I think are the next on my list,
    All adepts in the beautiful science of giving a pocket a twist;
    JEMMY CARRICK must follow his leaders, _ould_ PURNEY who put in a huff,
    By dancing a hornpipe at Tyburn, and bothering the hangman for snuff.

    There's PAUL LIDDY, the curly-pate Tory, whose noddle was stuck on a
              spike,
    And BILLY DELANEY, the "_Songster_,"[20] we never shall meet with
              his like;
    For his neck by a witch was anointed, and warranted safe by her charm,
    No hemp that was ever yet twisted his wonderful throttle could harm.

    And lastly, there's CAHIR NA CAPPUL, the handiest rogue of them all,
    Who only need whisper a word, and your horse will trot out of his
              stall;
    Your tit is not safe in your stable, though you or your groom should
              be near,
    And devil a bit in the paddock, if CAHIR gets _hould_ of his ear.

    Then success to the Tories of Ireland, the generous, the gallant,
              the gay!
    With them the best _Rumpads_[21] of England are not to be named the
              same day!
    And were further proof wanting to show what precedence we take with
              our _prigs_,
    Recollect that _our_ robbers are Tories, while those of _your_
              country are Whigs.

"Bravissimo!" cried Jack, drumming upon the table.

"Well," said Coates, "we've had enough about the Irish highwaymen, in
all conscience. But there's a rascal on our side of the Channel, whom
you have only incidentally mentioned, and who makes more noise than them
all put together."

"Who's that?" asked Jack, with some curiosity.

"Dick Turpin," replied the attorney: "he seems to me quite as worthy of
mention as any of the Hinds, the Du-Vals, or the O'Hanlons, you have
either of you enumerated."

"I did not think of him," replied Palmer, smiling; "though, if I had, he
scarcely deserves to be ranked with those illustrious heroes."

"Gads bobs!" cried Titus; "they tell me Turpin keeps the best nag in the
United Kingdom, and can ride faster and further in a day than any other
man in a week."

"So I've heard," said Palmer, with a glance of satisfaction. "I should
like to try a run with him. I warrant me, I'd not be far behind."

"I should like to get a peep at him," quoth Titus.

"So should I," added Coates. "Vastly!"

"You may both of you be gratified, gentlemen," said Palmer. "Talking of
Dick Turpin, they say, is like speaking of the devil, he's at your elbow
ere the word's well out of your mouth. He may be within hearing at this
moment, for anything we know to the contrary."

"Body o' me!" ejaculated Coates, "you don't say so? Turpin in Yorkshire!
I thought he confined his exploits to the neighborhood of the
metropolis, and made Epping Forest his headquarters."

"So he did," replied Jack, "but the cave is all up now. The whole of the
great North Road, from Tottenham Cross to York gates, comes within
Dick's present range; and Saint Nicholas only knows in which part of it
he is most likely to be found. He shifts his quarters as often and as
readily as a Tartar; and he who looks for him may chance to catch a
Tartar--ha!--ha!"

"It's a disgrace to the country that such a rascal should remain
unhanged," returned Coates, peevishly. "Government ought to look to it.
Is the whole kingdom to be kept in a state of agitation by a single
highwayman?--Sir Robert Walpole should take the affair into his own
hands."

"Fudge!" exclaimed Jack, emptying his glass.

"I have already addressed a letter to the editor of the _Common Sense_
on the subject," said Coates, "in which I have spoken my mind pretty
plainly: and I repeat, it is perfectly disgraceful that such a rascal
should be suffered to remain at large."

"You don't happen to have that letter by you, I suppose," said Jack, "or
I should beg the favor to hear it?--I am not acquainted with the
newspaper to which you allude;--I read _Fog's Journal_."

"So I thought," replied Coates, with a sneer; "that's the reason you are
so easily mystified. But luckily I have the paper in my pocket; and you
are quite welcome to my opinions. Here it is," added he, drawing forth a
newspaper. "I shall waive my preliminary remarks, and come to the point
at once."

"By all means," said Jack.

"'I thank God,'" began Coates, in an authoritative tone, "'that I was
born in a country that hath formerly emulated the Romans in their public
spirit; as is evident from their conquests abroad, and their struggles
for liberty at home.'"

"What has all this got to do with Turpin?" interposed Jack.

"You will hear," replied the attorney--"no interruptions if you please.
'But this noble principle,'" continued he, with great emphasis, "'though
not utterly lost, I cannot think at present so active as it ought to be
in a nation so jealous of her liberty.'"

"Good!" exclaimed Jack. "There is more than '_common sense_' in that
observation, Mr. Coates."

"'My suspicion,'" proceeded Coates, "'is founded on a late instance. I
mean the flagrant, undisturbed success of the notorious TURPIN, who hath
robb'd in a manner scarce ever known before for several years, and is
grown so insolent and impudent as to threaten particular persons, and
become openly dangerous to the lives as well as fortunes of the people
of England.'"

"Better and better," shouted Jack, laughing immoderately. "Pray go on,
sir."

"'That a fellow,'" continued Coates, "'who is known to be a thief by the
whole kingdom, shall for so long a time continue to rob us, and not only
rob us, but make a jest of us----'"

"Ha--ha--ha--capital! Excuse me, sir," roared Jack, laughing till the
tears ran down his cheeks--"pray, pray, go on."

"I see nothing to laugh at," replied Coates, somewhat offended;
"however, I will conclude my letter, since I have begun it--'not only
rob us, but make a jest of us, shall defy the laws, and laugh at
justice, argues a want of public spirit, which should make every
particular member of the community sensible of the public calamity, and
ambitious of the honor of extirpating such a notorious highwayman from
society, since he owes his long successes to no other cause than his
immoderate impudence, and the sloth and pusillanimity of those who ought
to bring him to justice.' I will not deny," continued Coates, "that,
professing myself, as I do, to be a staunch new Whig, I had not some
covert political object in penning this epistle.[22] Nevertheless,
setting aside my principles----"

"Right," observed Jack; "you Whigs, new or old, always set aside your
principles."

"Setting aside any political feeling I may entertain," continued Coates,
disregarding the interruption, "I repeat, I am ambitious of extirpating
this modern Cacus--this Autolycus of the eighteenth century."

"And what course do you mean to pursue?" asked Jack, "for I suppose you
do not expect to catch this '_ought-to-lick-us_,' as you call him, by a
line in the newspapers."

"I am in the habit of keeping my own counsel, sir," replied Coates,
pettishly; "and to be plain with you, I hope to finger all the reward
myself."

"Oons, is there a reward offered for Turpin's apprehension?" asked
Titus.

"No less than two hundred pounds," answered Coates, "and that's no
trifle, as you will both admit. Have you not seen the king's
proclamation, Mr. Palmer?"

"Not I," replied Jack, with affected indifference.

"Nor I," added Titus, with some appearance of curiosity; "do you happen
to have _that_ by you too?"

"I always carry it about with me," replied Coates, "that I may refer to
it in case of emergency. My father, Christopher, or Kit Coates, as he
was familiarly called, was a celebrated thief-taker. He apprehended
Spicket, and Child, and half a dozen others, and always kept their
descriptions in his pocket. I endeavor to tread in my worthy father's
footsteps. I hope to signalize myself by capturing a highwayman.
By-the-by," added he, surveying Jack more narrowly, "it occurs to me
that Turpin must be rather like you, Mr. Palmer?"

"Like me," said Jack, regarding Coates askance; "like me--how am I to
understand you, sir, eh?"

"No offence; none whatever, sir. Ah! stay, you won't object to my
comparing the description. That _can_ do no harm. Nobody would take you
for a highwayman--nobody whatever--ha! ha! Singular resemblance--he--he.
These things _do_ happen sometimes: not very often, though. But here is
Turpin's description in the _Gazette_, _June 28th_, A.D. 1737:--'_It
having been represented to the King that Richard Turpin did, on
Wednesday, the 4th of May last, rob on his Majesty's highway Vavasour
Mowbray, Esq., Major of the 2d troop of Horse Grenadiers_'--that Major
Mowbray, by-the-by, is a nephew of the late Sir Piers, and cousin of the
present baronet--'_and commit other notorious felonies and robberies
near London, his Majesty is pleased to promise his most gracious pardon
to any of his accomplices, and a reward of two hundred pounds to any
person or persons who shall discover him, so as he may be apprehended
and convicted_.'"

"Odsbodikins!" exclaimed Titus, "a noble reward! I should like to lay
hands upon Turpin," added he, slapping Palmer's shoulder: "I wish he
were in your place at this moment, Jack."

"Thank you!" replied Palmer, shifting his chair.

"'_Turpin_,'" continued Coates, "'_was born at Thacksted, in Essex; is
about thirty_'--you, sir, I believe, are about thirty?" added he,
addressing Palmer.

"Thereabouts," said Jack, bluffly. "But what has my age to do with that
of Turpin?"

"Nothing--nothing at all," answered Coates; "suffer me, however, to
proceed:--'_Is by trade a butcher_,'--you, sir, I believe, never had any
dealings in that line?"

"I have some notion how to dispose of a troublesome calf," returned
Jack. "But Turpin, though described as a butcher, is, I understand, a
lineal descendant of a great French archbishop of the same name."

"Who wrote the chronicles of that royal robber Charlemagne; I know him,"
replied Coates--"a terrible liar!--The modern Turpin '_is about five
feet nine inches high_'--exactly your height, sir--exactly!"

"I am five feet ten," answered Jack, standing bolt upright.

"You have an inch, then, in your favor," returned the unperturbed
attorney, deliberately proceeding with his examination--"'_he has a
brown complexion, marked with the smallpox_.'"

"My complexion is florid--my face without a seam," quoth Jack.

"Those whiskers would conceal anything," replied Coates, with a grin.
"Nobody wears whiskers nowadays, except a highwayman."

"Sir!" said Jack, sternly. "You are personal."

"I don't mean to be so," replied Coates; "but you must allow the
description tallies with your own in a remarkable manner. Hear me out,
however--'_his cheek bones are broad--his face is thinner towards the
bottom--his visage short--pretty upright--and broad about the
shoulders_.' Now I appeal to Mr. Tyrconnel if all this does not sound
like a portrait of yourself."

"Don't appeal to me," said Titus, hastily, "upon such a delicate point.
I can't say that I approve of a gentleman being likened to a highwayman.
But if ever there was a highwayman I'd wish to resemble, it's either
Redmond O'Hanlon or Richard Turpin; and may the devil burn me if I know
which of the two is the greater rascal!"

"Well, Mr. Palmer," said Coates, "I repeat, I mean no offence.
Likenesses are unaccountable. I am said to be like my Lord North;
whether I am or not, the Lord knows. But if ever I meet with Turpin I
shall bear you in mind--he--he! Ah! if ever I _should_ have the good
luck to stumble upon him, I've a plan for his capture which couldn't
fail. Only let me get a glimpse of him, that's all. You shall see how
I'll dispose of him."

"Well, sir, we _shall_ see," observed Palmer. "And for your own sake, I
wish you may never be nearer to him than you are at this moment. With
his friends, they say Dick Turpin can be as gentle as a lamb; with his
foes, especially with a limb of the law like yourself, he's been found
but an ugly customer. I once saw him at Newmarket, where he was collared
by two constable culls, one on each side. Shaking off one, and dealing
the other a blow in the face with his heavy-handled whip, he stuck spurs
into his mare, and though the whole field gave chase, he distanced them
all, easily."

"And how came you not to try your pace with him, if you were there, as
you boasted a short time ago?" asked Coates.

"So I did, and stuck closer to him than any one else. We were neck and
neck. I was the only person who could have delivered him to the hands of
justice, if I'd felt inclined."

"Zounds!" cried Coates; "If I had a similar opportunity, it should be
neck or nothing. Either he or I should reach the scragging-post first.
I'd take him, dead or alive."

"_You_ take Turpin?" cried Jack, with a sneer.

"I'd engage to do it," replied Coates. "I'll bet you a hundred guineas I
take him, if I ever have the same chance."

"Done!" exclaimed Jack, rapping the table at the same time, so that the
glasses danced upon it.

"That's right," cried Titus. "I'll go you halves."

"What's the matter--what's the matter?" exclaimed Small, awakened from
his doze.

"Only a trifling bet about a highwayman," replied Titus.

"A highwayman!" echoed Small. "Eh! what? there are none in the house, I
hope."

"I hope not," answered Coates. "But this gentleman has taken up the
defence of the notorious Dick Turpin in so singular a manner, that----"

"_Quod factu f[oe]dum est, idem est et Dictu Turpe_," returned Small.
"The less said about that rascal the better."

"So I think," replied Jack. "The fact is as you say, sir--were Dick
here, he would, I am sure, take the _freedom to hide 'em_."

Further discourse was cut short by the sudden opening of the door,
followed by the abrupt entrance of a tall, slender young man, who
hastily advanced towards the table, around which the company were
seated. His appearance excited the utmost astonishment in the whole
group: curiosity was exhibited in every countenance--the magnum remained
poised midway in the hand of Palmer--Dr. Small scorched his thumb in the
bowl of his pipe; and Mr. Coates was almost choked, by swallowing an
inordinate whiff of vapor.

"Young Sir Ranulph!" ejaculated he, as soon as the syncope would permit
him.

"Sir Ranulph here?" echoed Palmer, rising.

"Angels and ministers!" exclaimed Small.

"Odsbodikins!" cried Titus, with a theatrical start; "this is more than
I expected."

"Gentlemen," said Ranulph, "do not let my unexpected arrival here
discompose you. Dr. Small, you will excuse the manner of my greeting;
and you, Mr. Coates. One of the present party, I believe, was my
father's medical attendant, Dr. Tyrconnel."

"I had that honor," replied the Irishman, bowing profoundly--"I am Dr.
Tyrconnel, Sir Ranulph, at your service."

"When, and at what hour, did my father breathe his last, sir?" inquired
Ranulph.

"Poor Sir Piers," answered Titus, again bowing, "departed this life on
Thursday last."

"The hour?--the precise minute?" asked Ranulph, eagerly.

"Troth, Sir Ranulph, as nearly as I can recollect, it might be a few
minutes before midnight."

"The very hour!" exclaimed Ranulph, striding towards the window. His
steps were arrested as his eye fell upon the attire of his father,
which, as we have before noticed, hung at that end of the room. A slight
shudder passed over his frame. There was a momentary pause, during which
Ranulph continued gazing intently at the apparel. "The very dress, too!"
muttered he; then turning to the assembly, who were watching his
movements with surprise; "Doctor," said he, addressing Small, "I have
something for your private ear. Gentlemen, will you spare us the room
for a few minutes?"

"On my conscience," said Tyrconnel to Jack Palmer, as they quitted the
sanctum, "a mighty fine boy is this young Sir Ranulph!--and a chip of
the ould block!--he'll be as good a fellow as his father."

"No doubt," replied Palmer, shutting the door. "But what the devil
brought him back, just in the nick of it?"


[7] James Hind--the "Prince of Prigs"--a royalist captain of some
distinction, was hanged, drawn, and quartered, in 1652. Some good
stories are told of him. He had the credit of robbing Cromwell,
Bradshaw, and Peters. His discourse to Peters is particularly edifying.

[8] See Du-Val's life by Doctor Pope, or Leigh Hunt's brilliant sketch
of him in _The Indicator_.

[9] We cannot say much in favor of this worthy, whose name was Thomas
Simpson. The reason of his _sobriquet_ does not appear. He was not
particularly scrupulous as to his mode of appropriation. One of his
sayings is, however, on record. He told a widow whom he robbed, "that
the end of a woman's husband begins in tears, but the end of her tears
is another husband." "Upon which," says his chronicler, "the gentlewoman
gave him about fifty guineas."

[10] Tom was a sprightly fellow, and carried his sprightliness to the
gallows; for just before he was turned off he kicked Mr. Smith, the
ordinary, and the hangman out of the cart--a piece of pleasantry which
created, as may be supposed, no small sensation.

[11] Many agreeable stories are related of Holloway. His career,
however, closed with a murder. He contrived to break out of Newgate but
returned to witness the trial of one of his associates; when, upon the
attempt of a turnkey, one Richard Spurling, to seize him, Will knocked
him on the head in the presence of the whole court. For this offence he
suffered the extreme penalty of the law in 1712.

[12] Wicks's adventures with Madame Toly are highly diverting. It was
this hero--not Turpin, as has been erroneously stated--who stopped the
celebrated Lord Mohun. Of Gettings and Grey, and "the five or six," the
less said the better.

[13] One of Jack's recorded _mots_. When a Bible was pressed upon his
acceptance by Mr. Wagstaff, the chaplain, Jack refused it, saying, "that
in his situation one file would be worth all the Bibles in the world." A
gentleman who visited Newgate asked him to dinner; Sheppard replied,
"that he would take an early opportunity of waiting upon him." And we
believe he kept his word.

[14] The word Tory, as here applied, must not be confounded with the
term of party distinction now in general use in the political world. It
simply means a thief on a grand scale, something more than "a snapper-up
of unconsidered trifles," or petty-larceny rascal. We have classical
authority for this:--TORY: "An advocate for absolute monarchy; _also, an
Irish vagabond, robber, or rapparee_."--GROSE'S _Dictionary_.

[15] A trio of famous High-Tobygloaks. Swiftneck was a captain of
_Irish_ dragoons, by-the-bye.

[16] REDMOND O'HANLON was the Rob Roy of Ireland, and his adventures,
many of which are exceedingly curious, would furnish as rich _materials_
for the novelist, as they have already done for the ballad-mongers: some
of them are, however, sufficiently well narrated in a pleasant little
tome, published at Belfast, entitled _The History of the Rapparees_. We
are also in possession of a funeral discourse, preached at the obsequies
of the "noble and renowned" Henry St. John, Esq., who was unfortunately
killed by the _Tories_--the _Destructives_ of those days--in the
induction to which we find some allusion to Redmond. After describing
the thriving condition of the north of Ireland, about 1680, the Rev.
Lawrence Power, the author of the sermon, says, "One mischief there was,
which indeed in a great measure destroyed all, and that was a pack of
insolent bloody outlaws, whom they here call _Tories_. These had so
riveted themselves in these parts, that by the interest they had among
the natives, and some English, too, _to their shame be it spoken_, they
exercise a kind of separate sovereignty in three or four counties in the
north of Ireland. REDMOND O'HANLON is their chief, and has been these
many years; a cunning, dangerous fellow, who, though proclaimed an
outlaw with the rest of his crew, and sums of money set upon their
heads, yet he reigns still, and keeps all in subjection, so far that
'tis credibly reported _he raises more in a year by contributions
à-la-mode de France than the king's land taxes and chimney-money come
to, and thereby is enabled to bribe clerks and officers_, IF NOT THEIR
MASTERS, (!) _and makes all too much truckle to him_." Agitation, it
seems, was not confined to our own days--but the "finest country in the
world" has been, and ever will be, the same. The old game is played
under a new color--the only difference being, that had Redmond lived in
our time, he would, in all probability, not only have pillaged a county,
but _represented_ it in parliament. The spirit of the Rapparee is still
abroad--though we fear there is little of the _Tory_ left about it. We
recommend this note to the serious consideration of the declaimers
against the sufferings of the "six millions."

[17] Here Titus was slightly in error. He mistook the cause for the
effect. "They were called Rapparees," Mr. Malone says, "from being armed
with a half-pike, called by the Irish a _rapparee_."--TODD'S JOHNSON.

[18] _Tory_, so called from the Irish word _Toree_, give me your
money.--TODD'S JOHNSON.

[19] As he was carried to the gallows, Jack played a fine tune of his
own composing on the bagpipe, which retains the name of Macpherson's
tune to this day.--_History of the Rapparees_.

[20] "Notwithstanding he was so great a rogue, Delany was a handsome,
portly man, extremely diverting in company, and could behave himself
before gentlemen very agreeably. _He had a political genius_--not
altogether surprising in so eminent a _Tory_--and would have made great
proficiency in learning if he had rightly applied his time. He composed
several songs, and put tunes to them; and by his skill in music gained
the favor of some of the leading musicians in the country, who
endeavored to get him reprieved."--_History of the Rapparees_. The
particulars of the _Songster's_ execution are singular:--"When he was
brought into court to receive sentence of death, the judge told him that
he was informed he should say 'that there was not a rope in Ireland
sufficient to hang him. But,' says he, 'I'll try if Kilkenny can't
afford one strong enough to do your business; and if that will not do,
you shall have another, and another.' Then he ordered the sheriff to
choose a rope, and Delany was ordered for execution the next day. The
sheriff having notice of his mother's boasting that no rope could hang
her son--and pursuant to the judge's desire--provided two ropes, but
Delany broke them one after the other! The sheriff was then in a rage,
and went for three bed-cords, which he plaited threefold together, _and
they did his business_! Yet the sheriff was afraid he was not dead; and
in a passion, to make trial, stabbed him with his sword in the soles of
his feet, and at last cut the rope. After he was cut down, his body was
carried into the courthouse, where it remained in the coffin for two
days, standing up, till the judge and all the spectators were fully
satisfied that he was stiff and dead, and then permission was given to
his friends to remove the corpse and bury it."-_History of the
Rapparees_.

[21] Highwaymen, as contradistinguished from footpads.

[22] Since Mr. Coates here avows himself the writer of this diatribe
against Sir Robert Walpole, attacked under the guise of _Turpin_ in the
_Common Sense_ of July 30, 1737, it is useless to inquire further into
its authorship. And it remains only to refer the reader to the _Gents.
Mag._, vol. vii. p. 438, for the article above quoted; and for a reply
to it from the _Daily Gazetteer_ contained in p. 499 of the same volume.