_CAWOOD FERRY_

    The sight renewed my courser's feet,
    A moment, staggering feebly fleet,
    A moment, with a faint low neigh,
      He answered, and then fell.
    With gasps and glazing eyes he lay,
    And reeking limbs immovable,--
    His first, and last career was done.

                                                            _Mazeppa._


The sun had just o'ertopped the "high eastern hill," as Turpin reached
the Ferry of Cawood, and his beams were reflected upon the deep and
sluggish waters of the Ouse. Wearily had he dragged his course
thither--wearily and slow. The powers of his gallant steed were spent,
and he could scarcely keep her from sinking. It was now midway 'twixt
the hours of five and six. Nine miles only lay before him, and that
thought again revived him. He reached the water's edge, and hailed the
ferryboat, which was then on the other side of the river. At that
instant a loud shout smote his ear; it was the halloo of his pursuers.
Despair was in his look. He shouted to the boatman, and bade him pull
fast. The man obeyed; but he had to breast a strong stream, and had a
lazy bark and heavy sculls to contend with. He had scarcely left the
shore when, another shout was raised from the pursuers. The tramp of
their steeds grew louder and louder.

The boat had scarcely reached the middle of the stream. His captors were
at hand. Quietly did he walk down the bank, and as cautiously enter the
water. There was a plunge, and steed and rider were swimming down the
river.

Major Mowbray was at the brink of the stream. He hesitated an instant,
and stemmed the tide. Seized, as it were, by a mania for equestrian
distinction, Mr. Coates braved the torrent. Not so Paterson. He very
coolly took out his bulldogs, and, watching Turpin, cast up in his own
mind the _pros_ and _cons_ of shooting him as he was crossing. "I could
certainly hit him," thought, or said, the constable; "but what of that?
A dead highwayman is worth nothing--alive, he _weighs_ 300_l_. I won't
shoot him, but I'll make a pretence." And he fired accordingly.

The shot skimmed over the water, but did not, as it was intended, do
much mischief. It, however, occasioned a mishap, which had nearly proved
fatal to our aquatic attorney. Alarmed at the report of the pistol, in
the nervous agitation of the moment Coates drew in his rein so tightly
that his steed instantly sank. A moment or two afterwards he rose,
shaking his ears, and floundering heavily towards the shore; and such
was the chilling effect of this sudden immersion, that Mr. Coates now
thought much more of saving himself than of capturing Turpin. Dick,
meanwhile, had reached the opposite bank, and, refreshed by her bath,
Bess scrambled up the sides of the stream, and speedily regained the
road. "I shall do it yet," shouted Dick; "that stream has saved her.
Hark away, lass! Hark away!"

Bess heard the cheering cry, and she answered to the call. She roused
all her energies; strained every sinew, and put forth all her remaining
strength. Once more, on wings of swiftness, she bore him away from his
pursuers, and Major Mowbray, who had now gained the shore, and made
certain of securing him, beheld him spring, like a wounded hare, from
beneath his very hand.

"It cannot hold out," said the major; "it is but an expiring flash; that
gallant steed must soon drop."

"She be regularly booked, that's certain," said the postboy.

"We shall find her on the road."

Contrary to all expectation, however, Bess held on, and set pursuit at
defiance. Her pace was swift as when she started. But it was
unconscious and mechanical action. It wanted the ease, the lightness,
the life of her former riding. She seemed screwed up to a task which she
must execute. There was no flogging, no gory heel; but the heart was
throbbing, tugging at the sides within. Her spirit spurred her onwards.
Her eye was glazing; her chest heaving; her flank quivering; her crest
again fallen. Yet she held on. "She is dying!" said Dick. "I feel
it----" No, she held on.

Fulford is past. The towers and pinnacles of York burst upon him in all
the freshness, the beauty, and the glory of a bright, clear, autumnal
morn. The ancient city seemed to smile a welcome--a greeting. The noble
Minster and its serene and massive pinnacles, crocketed, lantern-like,
and beautiful; St. Mary's lofty spire, All-Hallows Tower, the massive
mouldering walls of the adjacent postern, the grim castle, and
Clifford's neighboring keep--all beamed upon him, like a bright-eyed
face, that laughs out openly.

"It is done--it is won," cried Dick. "Hurrah! hurrah!" And the sunny air
was cleft with his shouts.

Bess was not insensible to her master's exultation. She neighed feebly
in answer to his call, and reeled forwards. It was a piteous sight to
see her,--to mark her staring, protruding eyeball,--her shaking flanks;
but, while life and limb held together, she held on.

Another mile is past. York is near.

"Hurrah!" shouted Dick; but his voice was hushed. Bess tottered--fell.
There was a dreadful gasp--a parting moan--a snort; her eye gazed, for
an instant, upon her master, with a dying glare; then grew glassy,
rayless, fixed. A shiver ran through her frame. Her heart had burst.

Dick's eyes were blinded, as with rain. His triumph, though achieved,
was forgotten--his own safety was disregarded. He stood weeping and
swearing, like one beside himself.

"And art thou gone, Bess?" cried he, in a voice of agony, lifting up his
courser's head, and kissing her lips, covered with blood-flecked foam.
"Gone, gone! and I have killed the best steed that was ever crossed! And
for what?" added Dick, beating his brow with his clenched hand--"for
what? for what?"

At this moment the deep bell of the Minster clock tolled out the hour of
six.

"I am answered," gasped Dick; "_it was to hear those strokes_."

Turpin was roused from the state of stupefaction into which he had
fallen by a smart slap on the shoulder. Recalled to himself by the blow,
he started at once to his feet, while his hands sought his pistols: but
he was spared the necessity of using them, by discovering in the
intruder the bearded visage of the gipsy Balthazar. The patrico was
habited in mendicant weeds, and sustained a large wallet upon his
shoulders.

"So it's all over with the best mare in England, I see," said Balthazar;
"I can guess how it has happened--you are pursued?"

"I am," said Dick, roughly.

"Your pursuers are at hand?"

"Within a few hundred yards."

"Then, why stay here? Fly while you can."

"Never--never," cried Turpin; "I'll fight it out here by Bess's side.
Poor lass! I've killed her--but she has done it--ha, ha!--we have
won--what?" And his utterance was again choked.

"Hark! I hear the tramp of horse, and shouts," cried the patrico. "Take
this wallet. You will find a change of dress within it. Dart into that
thick copse--save yourself."

"But Bess--I cannot leave her," exclaimed Dick, with an agonizing look
at his horse.

"And what did Bess die for, but to save you?" rejoined the patrico.

"True, true," said Dick; "but take care of her, don't let those dogs of
hell meddle with her carcase."

"Away," cried the patrico, "leave Bess to me."

Possessing himself of the wallet, Dick disappeared in the adjoining
copse.

He had not been gone many seconds when Major Mowbray rode up.

"Who is this?" exclaimed the Major, flinging himself from his horse, and
seizing the patrico; "this is not Turpin."

"Certainly not," replied Balthazar, coolly. "I am not exactly the figure
for a highwayman."

"Where is he? What has become of him?" asked Coates, in despair, as he
and Paterson joined the major.

"Escaped, I fear," replied the major. "Have you seen any one, fellow?"
added he, addressing the patrico.

"I have seen no one," replied Balthazar. "I am only this instant
arrived. This dead horse lying in the road attracted my attention."

"Ha!" exclaimed Paterson, leaping from his steed, "this may be Turpin
after all. He has as many disguises as the devil himself, and may have
carried that goat's hair in his pocket." Saying which, he seized the
patrico by the beard, and shook it with as little reverence as the Gaul
handled the hirsute chin of the Roman senator.

"The devil! hands off," roared Balthazar. "By Salamon, I won't stand
such usage. Do you think a beard like mine is the growth of a few
minutes? Hands off! I say."

"Regularly done!" said Paterson, removing his hold of the patrico's
chin, and looking as blank as a cartridge.

"Ay," exclaimed Coates; "all owing to this worthless piece of carrion.
If it were not that I hope to see him dangling from those
walls"--pointing towards the Castle--"I should wish her master were by
her side now. To the dogs with her." And he was about to spurn the
breathless carcase of poor Bess, when a sudden blow, dealt by the
patrico's staff, felled him to the ground.

"I'll teach you to molest me," said Balthazar, about to attack Paterson.

"Come, come," said the discomfited chief constable, "no more of this.
It's plain we're in the wrong box. Every bone in my body aches
sufficiently without the aid of your cudgel, old fellow. Come, Mr.
Coates, take my arm, and let's be moving. We've had an infernal long
ride for nothing."

"Not so," replied Coates; "I've paid pretty dearly for it. However, let
us see if we can get any breakfast at the Bowling-green, yonder; though
I've already had my morning draught," added the facetious man of law,
looking at his dripping apparel.

"Poor Black Bess!" said Major Mowbray, wistfully regarding the body of
the mare, as it lay stretched at his feet. "Thou deservedst a better
fate, and a better master. In thee, Dick Turpin has lost his best
friend. His exploits will, henceforth, want the coloring of romance,
which thy unfailing energies threw over them. Light lie the ground over
thee, thou matchless mare!"

To the Bowling-green the party proceeded, leaving the patrico in
undisturbed possession of the lifeless body of Black Bess. Major Mowbray
ordered a substantial repast to be prepared with all possible
expedition.

A countryman, in a smock-frock, was busily engaged at his morning's
meal.

"To see that fellow bolt down his breakfast, one would think he had
fasted for a month," said Coates; "see the wholesome effects of an
honest, industrious life, Paterson. I envy him his appetite--I should
fall to with more zest were Dick Turpin in his place."

The countryman looked up. He was an odd-looking fellow, with a terrible
squint, and a strange, contorted countenance.

"An ugly dog!" exclaimed Paterson: "what a devil of a twist he has
got!"

"What's that you says about Dick Taarpin, measter?" asked the
countryman, with his mouth half full of bread.

"Have you seen aught of him?" asked Coates.

"Not I," mumbled the rustic; "but I hears aw the folks hereabouts talk
on him. They say as how he sets all the lawyers and constables at
defiance, and laughs in his sleeve at their efforts to cotch him--ha,
ha! He gets over more ground in a day than they do in a week--ho, ho!"

"That's all over now," said Coates, peevishly. "He has cut his own
throat--ridden his famous mare to death."

The countryman almost choked himself, in the attempt to bolt a huge
mouthful. "Ay--indeed, measter! How happened that?" asked he, so soon as
he recovered speech.

"The fool rode her from London to York last night," returned Coates;
"such a feat was never performed before. What horse could be expected to
live through such work as that?"

"Ah, he were a foo' to attempt that," observed the countryman; "but you
followed belike?"

"We did."

"And took him arter all, I reckon?" asked the rustic, squinting more
horribly than ever.

"No," returned Coates, "I can't say we did; but we'll have him yet. I'm
pretty sure he can't be far off. We may be nearer him than we imagine."

"May be so, measter," returned the countryman; "but might I be so bold
as to ax how many horses you used i' the chase--some half-dozen, maybe?"

"Half a dozen!" growled Paterson; "we had twenty at the least."

"And I ONE!" mentally ejaculated Turpin, for he was the countryman.