_MR. COATES_

    _Grimm._ Look, captain, here comes one of the bloodhounds of justice.

    _Schw._  Down with him. Don't let him utter a word.

    _Moor._  Silence, I will hear him.

                                              SCHILLER: _The Robbers_.


Gladly do we now exchange the dank atmosphere of Saint Cyprian's cell,
and the horrors which have detained us there so long, for balmy air,
genial sunshine, and the boon companionship of Dick Turpin. Upon
regaining the verdant ruins of the ancient priory, all appeared pretty
much as our highwayman had left it. Dick wended towards his mare. Black
Bess uttered an affectionate whinnying sound as he approached her, and
yielded her sleek neck to his caresses. No Bedouin Arab ever loved his
horse more tenderly than Turpin.

"'Twill be a hard day when thou and I part!" murmured he, affectionately
patting her soft and silky cheeks. Bess thrust her nose into his hand,
biting him playfully, as much as to say, "That day will never arrive."
Turpin, at least, understood the appeal in that sense; he was skilled in
the language of the Houyhnhnms. "I would rather lose my right hand than
_that_ should happen," sighed he; "but there's no saying: the best of
friends must part; and thou and I may be one day separated: thy
destination is the knacker--mine, perhaps, the gibbet.--We are neither
of us cut out for old age, that's certain. Curse me if I can tell how it
is; since I've been in that vault, I've got some queer crotchet into my
head. I can't help likening thee to that poor gipsy wench, Sybil; but
may I be scragged if I'd use thee as her lover has used her. Ha!"
exclaimed he, drawing a pistol with a suddenness that made his
companions, Rust and Wilder, start, "we are watched. See you not how yon
shadow falls from behind the wall?"

"I do," replied Rust.

"The varmint shall be speedily unearthed," said Wilder, rushing to the
spot.

In another instant the shadow manifested itself in a substantial little
personage, booted, spurred, and mud-bespattered. He was brought before
our highwayman, who had, meanwhile, vaulted into his saddle.

"Mr. Coates!" cried Dick, bursting into a loud laugh at the ridiculous
figure presented to his view, "or the mud deceives me."

"It does not deceive you, Captain Turpin," replied the attorney; "you
do, indeed, behold that twice unfortunate person."

"What brings you here?" asked Dick. "Ah! I see, you are come to pay me
my wager."

"I thought you gave me a _discharge_ for that," rejoined Coates, unable,
even in his distress, to resist the too-tempting quibble.

"True, but it was _in blank_," replied Turpin readily; "and that don't
hold good in law, you know. You have thrown away a second chance. Play
or pay, all the world over. I shan't _let you off_ so easily this time,
depend upon it. Come, post the pony, or take your measure on that sod.
No more replications or rejoinders, sir, down with the dust. Fake his
clies, pals. Let us see what he has about him."

"In the twinkling of a bed-post," replied Rust. "We'll turn him inside
out. What's here?" cried he, searching the attorney's pockets. "A brace
of barkers," handing a pair of pistols to Turpin, "a haddock, stuffed
with nothing, I'm thinking; one quid, two coach-wheels, half a bull,
three hogs, and a kick; a d--d dicky concern, captain."

"Three hogs and a kick," muttered Coates; "the knave says true enough."

"Is there nothing else?" demanded Dick.

"Only an old snuffy fogle and a pewter sneezer."

"No reader?[90] Try his hoxter."[91]

"Here's a pit-man,[92] captain."

"Give it me. Ah! this will do," cried Dick, examining the contents of
the pocket-book. "This is a glorious windfall indeed; a bill of exchange
for 500_l._, payable _on demand_, eh, Mr. Coates? Quick! indorse it,
sir. Here's pen and ink. Rascal! if you attempt to tear the bill, I'll
blow your brains out. Steady, sir, sign. Good!" added he, as Coates most
reluctantly indorsed the bill. "Good! good! I'll be off with this bill
to London to-night, before you can stop it. No courier can beat
Bess--ha, ha! Eh! what's this?" continued Dick, as, unfolding another
leaf of the pocket-book, he chanced upon a letter; "My Lady Rookwood's
superscription! Excuse me, Mr. Coates, I must have a peep at her
ladyship's billet-doux. All's safe with me--man of honor. I must detain
your _reader_ a moment longer."

"You should take charge of yourself, then," replied Coates, sulkily.
"_You_ appear to be my reader."

"Bravo!" cried Turpin. "You may jest now with impunity, Mr. Coates. You
have paid dear enough for your jokes; and when should a man be allowed
to be pleasant, if not at his own expense?--ha, ha! What's this?"
exclaimed he, opening the letter. "A ring, as I'm awake! and from her
ladyship's own fair finger, I'll be sworn, for it bears her cipher,
ineffaceably impressed as your image upon her heart--eh, Coates? Egad!
you are a lucky dog, after all, to receive _such_ a favor from _such_ a
lady--ha, ha! Meantime, I'll take care of it for you," continued Dick,
slipping the ring on his little finger.

Turpin, we have before remarked, had a turn for mimicry; and it was with
an irresistible feeling of deferential awe creeping over him that Coates
heard the contents of Lady Rookwood's epistle delivered with an
enunciation as peremptory and imperious as that of her ladyship's self.
The letter was hastily indited, in a clear, firm hand, and partook of
its writer's decision of character. Dick found no difficulty in
deciphering it. Thus ran the missive:

    "Assured of your devotion and secrecy, I commit my own honor, and
    that of my son, to your charge. Time will not permit me to see you,
    or I would not write. But I place myself entirely in your hands. You
    will not dare to betray my confidence. To the point:--A Major
    Mowbray has just arrived here with intelligence that the body of
    Susan Bradley--you will know to whom I allude--has been removed from
    our family vault by a Romish priest and his assistants. How it came
    there, or why it has been removed, I know not; it is not my present
    purpose to inquire. Suffice it, that it now lies in a vault beneath
    the ruins of Davenham Priory. My son, Sir Ranulph, who has lent a
    credulous ear to the artful tales of the impostor who calls this
    woman mother, is at present engaged in arming certain of the
    household, and of the tenantry, to seize upon and bring away this
    body, as resistance is apprehended from a horde of gipsies who
    infest the ruins. Now, mark me. THAT BODY MUST NOT BE FOUND! Be it
    your business to prevent its discovery. Take the fleetest horse you
    can procure; spare neither whip nor spur. Haste to the priory;
    procure by any means, and at any expense, the assistance of the
    gipsies. Find out the body; conceal it, destroy it--do what you
    will, so my son find it not. Fear not his resentment; I will bear
    you harmless of the consequences with him. You will act upon my
    responsibility. I pledge my honor for your safety. Use all despatch,
    and calculate upon due requital from

                                              "MAUD ROOKWOOD.

    "Haste, and God speed you!"

"God speed you!" echoed Dick, in his own voice, contemptuously. "The
devil drive you! would have been a fitter postscript. And it was upon
this precious errand you came, Mr. Coates?"

"Precisely," replied the attorney; "but I find the premises preoccupied.
Fast as I have ridden, you are here before me."

"And what do you now propose to do?" asked Turpin.

"Bargain with you for the body," replied Coates, in an insinuating tone.

"With _me_!" said Dick; "do you take me for a resurrection cove; for a
dealer in dead stock, eh! sirrah?"

"I take you for one sufficiently _alive_, in a general way, to his own
interests," returned Coates. "These gentlemen may not, perhaps, be quite
so scrupulous, when they hear my proposals."

"Be silent, sir," interrupted Turpin. "Hist! I hear the tramp of horses'
hoofs without. Hark! that shout."

"Make your own terms before they come," said Coates. "Leave all to me.
I'll put 'em on a wrong scent."

"To the devil with your terms," cried Turpin; "the signal!" And he
pulled the trigger of one of Coates's pistols, the shot of which rang in
the ears of the astounded attorney as it whizzed past him. "Drag him
into the mouth of the vault," thundered Turpin: "he will be a capital
cover in case of attack. Look to your sticks, and be on the
alert;--away!"

Vainly did the unfortunate attorney kick and struggle, swear and scream;
his hat was pushed over his eyes; his bob-wig thrust into his mouth; and
his legs tripped from under him. Thus blind, dumb, and half-suffocated,
he was hurried into the entrance of the cell.

Dick, meanwhile, dashed to the arched outlet of the ruin. He there drew
in the rein, and Black Bess stood motionless as a statue.


[90] Pocket-book.

[91] Inside coat-pocket.

[92] A small pocket-book.