_THE CAPTIVE_

    _Black Will._ Which is the place where we're to be concealed?

    _Green._      This inner room.

    _Black Will._ 'Tis well. The word is, "Now I take you."

                                                 _Arden of Feversham._


Guarded by the two young farmers who had displayed so much address in
seizing him, Luke, meanwhile, had been conveyed in safety to the small
chamber in the eastern wing, destined by Mr. Coates to be his place of
confinement for the night. The room, or rather closet, opening from
another room, was extremely well adapted for the purpose, having no
perceptible outlet; being defended, on either side, by thick partition
walls of the hardest oak, and at the extremity by the solid masonry of
the mansion. It was, in fact, a remnant of the building anterior to the
first Sir Ranulph's day; and the narrow limits of Luke's cell had been
erected long before the date of his earliest progenitor. Having seen
their prisoner safely bestowed, the room was carefully examined, every
board sounded, every crevice and corner peered into by the curious eye
of the little lawyer; and nothing being found insecure, the light was
removed, the door locked, the rustic constables dismissed, and a brace
of pistols having been loaded and laid on the table, Mr. Coates
pronounced himself thoroughly satisfied and quite comfortable.

Comfortable! Titus heaved a sigh as he echoed the word. He felt anything
but comfortable. His heart was with the body all the while. He thought
of the splendor of the funeral, the torches, the illumined church, his
own dignified march down the aisle, and the effect he expected to
produce amongst the bewildered rustics. He thought of all these things,
and cursed Luke by all the saints in the calendar. The sight of the
musty old apartment, hung round with faded arras, which, as he said,
"smelt of nothing but rats and ghosts, and suchlike varmint," did not
serve to inspirit him; and the proper equilibrium of his temper was not
completely restored until the appearance of the butler, with all the
requisites for the manufacture of punch, afforded him some prospective
solace.

"And what are they about now, Tim?" asked Titus.

"All as jolly as can be," answered the domestic; "Dr. Small is just
about to pronounce the funeral 'ration."

"Devil take it," ejaculated Titus, "there's another miss! Couldn't I
just slip out, and hear that?"

"On no account," said Coates. "Consider, Sir Ranulph is there."

"Well, well," rejoined Titus, heaving a deep sigh, and squeezing a
lemon; "are you sure this is _biling_ water, Tim? You know, I'm mighty
particular."

"Perfectly aware of it, sir."

"Ah, Tim, do you recollect the way I used to brew for poor Sir Piers,
with a bunch of red currants at the bottom of the glass? And then to
think that, after all, I should be left out of his funeral--it's the
height of barbarity. Tim, this rum of yours is poor stuff--there's no
punch worth the trouble of drinking, except whisky-punch. A glass of
right potheen, straw-color, peat-flavor, ten degrees over proof, would
be the only thing to drown my cares. Any such thing in the cellar? There
used to be an odd bottle or so, Tim--in the left bin, near the door."

"I've a notion there be," returned Timothy. "I'll try the bin your
honor mentions, and if I can lay hands upon a bottle you shall have it,
you may depend."

The butler departed, and Titus, emulating Mr. Coates, who had already
enveloped himself, like Juno at the approach of Ixion, in a cloud,
proceeded to light his pipe.

Luke, meanwhile, had been left alone, without light. He had much to
meditate upon, and with naught to check the current of his thoughts, he
pensively revolved his present situation and future prospects. The
future was gloomy enough--the present fraught with danger. And now that
the fever of excitement was passed, he severely reproached himself for
his precipitancy.

His mind, by degrees, assumed a more tranquil state; and, exhausted with
his great previous fatigue, he threw himself upon the floor of his
prison-house, and addressed himself to slumber. The noise he made
induced Coates to enter the room, which he did with a pistol in each
hand, followed by Titus with a pipe and candle; but finding all safe the
sentinels retired.

"One may see, with half an eye, that you're not used to a feather-bed,
my friend," said Titus, as the door was locked. "By the powers, he's a
tall chap, anyhow--why his feet almost touch the door. I should say that
room was a matter of six feet long, Mr. Coates."

"Exactly six feet, sir."

"Well, that's a good guess. Hang that ugly rascal, Tim; he's never
brought the whisky. But I'll be even with him to-morrow. Couldn't you
just see to the prisoner for ten minutes, Mr. Coates?"

"Not ten seconds. I shall report you, if you stir from your post."

Here the door was opened, and Tim entered with the whisky.

"Arrah! by my soul, Tim, and here you are at last--uncork it, man, and
give us a thimbleful--blob! there goes the stopper--here's a
glass"--smacking his lips--"whist, Tim, another drop--stuff like this
will never hurt a body. Mr. Coates, try it--no--I thought you'd be a man
of more taste."

"I must limit you to a certain quantity," replied Coates, "or you will
not be fit to keep guard--another glass must be the extent of your
allowance."

"Another glass! and do you think I'll submit to any such iniquitous
proposition?"

"Beg pardon, gentlemen," said Tim, "but her ladyship desires me to tell
you both, that she trusts you will keep the strictest watch upon the
prisoner. I have the same message also from Sir Ranulph."

"Do you hear that?" said Coates.

"And what are they all about now, Tim?" groaned Titus.

"Just starting, sir," returned Tim; "and, indeed, I must not lose my
time gossiping here, for I be wanted below. You must be pleased to take
care of yourselves, gentlemen, for an hour or so, for there will be only
a few women-kind left in the house. The storm's just over, and the men
are all lighting their torches. Oh, it's a grand sight!" And off set
Tim.

"Bad luck to myself, anyhow," ejaculated Titus; "this is more than I can
bear--I've had enough of this watch and ward business--if the prisoner
stirs, shoot him, if you think proper--I'll be back in an hour."

"I tell you what, Mr. Tyrconnel," said Coates, coolly taking up the
pistol from the table, "I'm a man of few words, but those few are, I
hope, to the purpose, and I'd have you to know if you stir from that
chair, or attempt to leave the room, damme but I'll send a brace of
bullets after you. I'm serious, I assure you." And he cocked the pistol.

By way of reply to this menace, Titus deliberately filled a stiff glass
of whisky-and-water.

"That's your last glass," said the inexorable Coates.

To return once more to Luke. He slept uneasily for some short space,
and was awakened by a sound which reached his dreaming ears and
connected itself with the visions that slumber was weaving around him.
It was some moments before he could distinctly remember where he was. He
would not venture to sleep again, though he felt overwhelmed by
drowsiness--there was a fixed pain at his heart, as if circulation were
suspended. Changing his posture, he raised himself upon one arm; he then
became aware of a scratching noise, somewhat similar to the sound he had
heard in his dream, and perceived a light gleaming through a crevice in
the oaken partition. His attention was immediately arrested, and placing
his eye close to the chink, he distinctly saw a dark lantern burning,
and by its light a man filing some implement of housebreaking. The light
fell before the hard features of the man, with whose countenance Luke
was familiar; and although only one person came within the scope of his
view, Luke could make out, from a muttered conversation that was carried
on, that he had a companion. The parties were near to him, and though
speaking in a low tone, Luke's quick ear caught the following:

"What keeps Jack Palmer, I wonder?" said he of the file. "We're all
ready for the fakement--pops primed--and I tell you what, Rob Rust, I've
made my clasp-knife as sharp as a razor, and damme, if Lady Rookwood
offers any resistance, I'll spoil her talking in future, I promise you."

Suppressed laughter from Rust followed this speech. That laugh made
Luke's blood run cold within his veins.

"Harkee, Dick Wilder, you're a reg'lar out-and-outer, and stops at
nothing, and curse me if I'd think any more of it than yourself. But
Jack's as squeamish of bloodshed as young Miss that cries at her cut
finger. It's the safer plan. Say what you will, nothing but _that_ will
stop a woman's tongue."

"I shall make short work with her ladyship to-night, anyhow. Hist! here
Jack comes."

A footstep crossed in the room, and, presently afterwards, exclamations
of surprise and smothered laughter were heard from the parties.

"Bravo, Jack! famous! that disguise would deceive the devil himself."

"And now, my lads," said the newcomer, "is all right?"

"Right and tight."

"Nothing forgotten?"

"Nothing."

"Then off with your stamps, and on with your list slippers; not a word.
Follow me, and, for your lives, don't move a step but as I direct you.
The word must be, '_Sir Piers Rookwood calls_.' We'll overhaul the swag
here. This crack may make us all for life; and if you'll follow my
directions implicitly, we'll do the trick in style. This slum must be
our rendezvous when all's over; for hark ye, my lads, I'll not budge an
inch till Luke Bradley be set free. He's an old friend, and I always
stick by old friends. I'd do the same for one of you if you were in the
same scrape, so, damn you, no flinching; besides, I owe that
spider-shanked, snivelling split-cause Coates, who stands sentry, a
grudge, and I'll pay him off, as Paul did the Ephesians. You may crop
his ears, or slit his tongue as you would a magpie's, or any other
chattering varmint; make him sign his own testament, or treat him with a
touch of your _Habeas Corpus_ Act, if you think proper, or give him a
taste of blue plumb. One thing only I stipulate, that you don't hurt
that fat, mutton-headed Broganeer, whatever he may say or do; he's a
devilish good fellow. And now to business."

Saying which, they noiselessly departed. But carefully as the door was
closed, Luke's ear could detect the sound. His blood boiled with
indignation; and he experienced what all must have felt who have been
similarly situated, with the will, but not the power, to assist
another--a sensation almost approaching to torture. At this moment a
distant scream burst upon his ears--another--he hesitated no longer.
With all his force he thundered at the door.

"What do you want, rascal?" cried Coates, from without.

"There are robbers in the house."

"Thank you for the information. There is one I know of already."

"Fool, they are in Lady Rookwood's room. Run to her assistance."

"A likely story, and leave you here."

"Do you hear that scream?"

"Eh, what--what's that? I do hear something." Here Luke dashed with all
his force against the door. It yielded to the blow, and he stood before
the astonished attorney.

"Advance a footstep, villain," exclaimed Coates, presenting both his
pistols, "and I lodge a brace of balls in your head."

"Listen to me," said Luke; "the robbers are in Lady Rookwood's
chamber--they will plunder the place of everything--perhaps murder her.
Fly to her assistance, I will accompany you--assist you--it is your only
chance."

"_My_ only chance--_your_ only chance. Do you take me for a greenhorn?
This is a poor subterfuge; could you not have vamped up something
better? Get back to your own room, or I shall make no more of shooting
you than I would of snuffing that candle."

"Be advised, sir," continued Luke. "There are three of them--give me a
pistol, and fear nothing."

"Give _you_ a pistol! Ha, ha!--to be its mark myself. You are an amusing
rascal, I will say."

"Sir, I tell you not a moment is to be lost. Is life nothing? Lady
Rookwood may be murdered."

"I tell _you_, once for all, it won't do. Go back to your room, or take
the consequences."

"By the powers! but it shall do, anyhow," exclaimed Titus, flinging
himself upon the attorney, and holding both his arms; "you've bullied me
long enough. I'm sure the lad's in the right."

Luke snatched the pistols from the hands of Coates.

"Very well, Mr. Tyrconnel; very well, sir," cried the attorney, boiling
with wrath, and spluttering out his words. "Extremely well, sir. You are
not perhaps aware, sir, what you have done; but you will repent this,
sir--repent, I say--repent was my word, Mr. Tyrconnel."

"Poh!--poh!" replied Titus. "I shall never repent a good-natured
action."

"Follow me," cried Luke; "settle your disputes hereafter. Quick, or we
shall be too late."

Coates bustled after him, and Titus, putting the neck of the forbidden
whisky bottle to his lips, and gulping down a hasty mouthful, snatched
up a rusty poker, and followed the party with more alacrity than might
have been expected from so portly a personage.