_ALAN ROOKWOOD_

    The wolf shall find her grave, and scrape it up;
    Not to devour the corse, but to discover
    The horrid murther.

                                                              WEBSTER.


"Bravo! capital!" cried Turpin, laughing loud and long as an Olympian
deity; "has this simple wench outwitted you all; turned the tables upon
the whole gang of plotters, eh? Excellent! ha, ha, ha! The next time you
wed, Sir Luke, let me advise you not to choose a wife in the dark. A man
should have all his senses about him on these occasions. Make love when
the liquor's in; marry when it's out, and, above all, with your eyes
open. This beats cock-fighting--ha, ha, ha!--you must excuse me; but,
upon my soul, I can't help it." And his laughter seemed
inextinguishable.

"Take your men without," whispered Alan Rookwood; "keep watch as before,
and let the discharge of a pistol bespeak the approach of danger as
agreed upon; much yet remains to be done here."

"How so?" asked Dick; "it seems to me the job's entirely settled--if not
to _your_ satisfaction. I'm always ready to oblige my friend, Sir Luke;
but curse me if I'd lend my help to any underhand work. Steer clear of
foul play, or Dick Turpin holds no hand with you. As to that poor wench,
if you mean her any harm, curse me if I will----"

"No harm is intended her," replied Alan. "I applaud your magnanimity,"
added he, sarcastically; "such sentiments are, it must be owned, in
excellent keeping with your conduct."

"In keeping or not," replied Turpin, gravely, "cold-blooded murder is
altogether out of my line, and I wash my hands of it. A shot or two in
self defence is another matter; and when----"

"A truce to this," interrupted Alan; "the girl is safe. Will you mount
guard again?"

"If that be the case, certainly," replied Dick. "I shall be glad to get
back to Bess. I couldn't bring her with me into this black hole. A
couple of shots will tell you 'tis Ranulph Rookwood. But mind, no harm
to the gipsy girl--to Lady Rookwood, I should say. She's a jewel, take
my word for it, which Sir Luke must be mad to throw away." And calling
his companions, he departed.

Alan Rookwood bent his steps towards the gipsy queen. Dark thoughts
gathered quickly o'er his brow. He smiled as he drew nigh to Barbara--a
smile it was

    That wrinkled up his skin even to the hair.

Barbara looked at him at first with distrust; but as he developed his
secret purposes, that smile became reflected upon her own features.
Their conference took place apart. We willingly leave them to return to
the altar.

Mrs. Mowbray and the priest were still there. Both were occupied in
ineffectual endeavors to restore Eleanor to consciousness. She recovered
from her swoon; but it was evident her senses still wandered; and vainly
did Mrs. Mowbray lavish her tenderest caresses upon her child. Eleanor
returned them not.

Luke, meanwhile, had given vent to the wildest fury. He shook away
Sybil's grasp; he dashed her from him; he regarded her with withering
glances; he loaded her with reproaches. She bore his violence with
meekest submission; she looked imploringly--but she replied not to his
taunts. Again she clung to the hem of his garment when cast aside. Luke
appeared unmoved; what passed within we pause not to examine. He grew
calmer; his calmness was more terrible to Sybil than his previous wrath
had been.

"You are my wife," said he; "what then? By fraud, by stratagem, you have
obtained that title, and, perforce, must keep it. But the title _only_
shall you retain. No rights of wife shall ever be yours. It will be in
your power to call yourself Lady Rookwood--you will be so in name--in
nothing else."

"I shall not bear it long," murmured Sybil.

Luke laughed scornfully, "So you said before," replied he; "and yet I
see not why you are likely to abandon it. The event will show. Thus far
you have deceived me, and I place no further faith in your assertions.
My hand was yours; you refused it. When I would give it to another, you
grasp it clandestinely. Am I to believe you now? The wind will
change--the vane veer with it."

"It will not veer from you," she meekly answered.

"Why did you step between me and my bride?"

"To save her life; to lay down mine for hers."

"An idle subterfuge. You know well that you run no risk of being called
upon to do so. Your life is in no danger. The sacrifice was unnecessary.
I could have dispensed with _your_ assistance; my own arm would have
sufficed to protect Eleanor."

"Your single arm would not have prevailed against numbers: they would
have killed you likewise."

"Tush!" said Luke, fiercely. "Not only have you snatched from me my
bride, you have robbed me of my fair estates, of all, save of my barren
title, and that, even _that_, you have tarnished."

"True, true," sighed Sybil. "I knew not that the lands were hers, else
had I never done it."

"False, false," cried Luke; "false as the rest. _They_ will be
Ranulph's. _She_ will be Ranulph's. I shall still be an outcast, while
Ranulph will riot in my halls--will press her to his bosom. Cling not to
me. Hence! or I will spurn you from me. I am undone, undone by you,
accursed one."

"Oh, curse me not! your words cut deep enough."

"Would they could kill you," cried Luke, with savage bitterness. "You
have placed a bar between me and my prospects, which nothing can now
remove--nothing but--ha!" and his countenance assumed a deadly hue and
fearful expression. "By Heaven, you almost rouse the fell spirit which
it is said dwells within the breast of my devoted race. I feel as if I
could stab thee."

"No, no!" shrieked Sybil; "for mercy's sake, for your own sake, do not
stab me. It is not too late. I will repair my wrong!"

"Ever deceiving! you would again delude me. You cannot repair it. One
way alone remains, and that----"

"I will pursue," responded Sybil, sadly, but firmly.

"Never!" cried Luke; "you shall not. Ha!" exclaimed he, as he found his
arms suddenly pinioned behind him. "What new treachery is this? By whose
orders am I thus fettered?"

"By mine," said Alan Rookwood, stepping forward.

"By yours?" echoed Luke. "And wherefore? Release me."

"Be patient," replied Alan. "You will hear all anon. In the meantime you
must be content to remain my prisoner. Quit not your hold," added he,
addressing the gipsies, who kept charge of Luke.

"Their lives shall answer for their obedience," said Barbara.

Upon a further signal from Alan, Eleanor was torn from her mother's
arms, and a bandage passed so suddenly over Mrs. Mowbray's face, that,
before she could raise a cry of alarm, all possibility of utterance was
effectually prevented. The priest alone was left at liberty.

Barbara snatched the hand of Eleanor. She dragged her to Sybil.

"You are Lady Rookwood," whispered she; "but she has your domains. I
give her to you."

"She is the _only bar_ between thy husband and his rights," whispered
Alan Rookwood, in a tone of horrible irony; "_it is not too late to
repair your wrong_."

"Away, tempter!" cried Sybil, horror-stricken. "I know you well. Yet,"
continued she, in an altered tone, "I will risk all for him. I have done
him wrong. One mode of atonement remains; and, horrible though it be, I
will embrace it. Let me not pause. Give her to me." And she seized upon
the unresisting hand of Eleanor.

"Do you need my aid?" asked Barbara.

"No," replied Sybil; "let none approach us. A clapping of hands will let
you know when all is over." And she dragged her passive victim deeper
into the vault.

"Sybil, Sybil!" cried Luke, struggling with frantic violence to liberate
himself; "hurt her not. I was rash. I was mad. I am calmer now. She
hears me not--she will not turn. God of heaven! she will murder her. It
will be done while I speak. I am the cause of all. Release me, villains!
Would that I had died ere I had seen this day."

At a signal from the sexton, Luke also was blindfolded. He ceased to
struggle. But his laboring breast told of the strife within.

"Miscreants!" exclaimed the priest, who had hitherto witnessed the
proceedings in horror. "Why do not these rocks fall in, and crush you
and your iniquities? Save her! oh, save her! Have you no pity for the
innocent?"

"Such pity have we," replied Alan Rookwood, "as you showed my daughter.
She was as innocent as Eleanor Mowbray, and yet you did not pity _her_."

"Heaven is my witness," exclaimed the priest, "that I never injured
her."

"Take not Heaven's name in vain," cried Alan. "Who stood by while it was
doing? Whose firmer hand lent aid to the murderer's trembling efforts?
Whose pressure stifled her thrilling screams, and choked her cries for
mercy? Yours--yours; and now you prate to me of pity--you, the slayer of
the sleeping and the innocent!"

"'Tis false!" exclaimed the priest, in extremity of terror.

"False!" echoed Alan. "I had Sir Piers's own confession. He told me all.
You had designs upon Sir Piers, which his wife opposed; you hated her;
you were in the confidence of both--how did you keep that confidence? He
told me _how_, by awakening a spirit of jealousy and pride, that
o'ermastered all his better feelings. False! He told me of your hellish
machinations; your Jesuitical plots; your schemes. He was too weak, too
feeble an instrument to serve you. You left him, but not before _she_
had left him. False! ha, I have that shall instantly convict you. The
corpse is here, within this cell. Who brought it hither?"

The priest was silent: he seemed confounded by Alan's violence.

"I will answer that question," said Barbara. "It was brought hither by
that false priest. His agent, Balthazar, has betrayed him. It was
brought hither to prevent the discovery of Sir Luke Rookwood's
legitimacy. He meant to make his own terms about it. It has come hither
to proclaim his guilt--to be a fearful witness against him." Then,
turning to Checkley, she added, "You have called Heaven to witness your
innocence: you shall attest it by oath upon that body; and should aught
indicate your guilt, I will hang you as I would a dog, and clear off one
long score with justice. Do you shrink from this?"

"No," replied the priest, in a voice hollow and broken. "Bring me to the
body."

"Seize each an arm," said Barbara, addressing Zoroaster and the knight
of Malta, "and lead him to the corse."

"I will administer the oath," said Alan Rookwood, sternly.

"No, not you," stammered the priest.

"And wherefore not?" asked Alan. "If you are innocent, you need fear
nothing from her."

"I fear nothing from the _dead_," replied Checkley; "lead on."

We will now return to Sybil. She was alone with her victim. They were
near the mouth of the cell which had been Prior Cyprian's flinty
dormitory, and were almost involved in darkness. A broken stream of
light glanced through the pillars. Eleanor had not spoken. She suffered
herself to be dragged thither without resistance, scarcely conscious, it
would seem, of her danger. Sybil gazed upon her for some minutes with
sorrow and surprise. "She comprehends not her perilous situation,"
murmured Sybil. "She knows not that she stands upon the brink of the
grave. Oh! would that she could pray. Shall I, her murderess, pray for
her? My prayers would not be heard. And yet, to kill her unshriven will
be a twofold crime. Let me not look on her. My hand trembles. I can
scarce grasp the dagger. Let me think on all he has said. I have wronged
him. I am his bane, his curse! I have robbed him of all: there is but
one remedy--'tis _this_!--Oh, God! she recovers. I cannot do it now."

It was a fearful moment for Eleanor's revival, when the bright steel
flashed before her eyes. Terror at once restored her. She cast herself
at Sybil's feet.

"Spare, spare me!" cried she. "Oh! what a dream I have had. And to waken
thus, with the dagger's point at my breast. You will not kill me--you,
gentle maid, who promised to preserve me. Ah, no, I am sure you will
not."

"Appeal no more to me," said Sybil, fiercely. "Make your peace with
Heaven. Your minutes are numbered."

"I cannot pray," said Eleanor, "while you are near me."

"Will you pray if I retire and leave you?"

"No, no. I dare not--cannot," shrieked Eleanor, in extremity of terror.
"Oh! do not leave me, or let me go."

"If you stir," said Sybil, "I stab you to the heart."

"I will not stir. I will kneel here forever. Stab me as I kneel--as I
pray to you. You cannot kill me while I cling to you thus--while I kiss
your hands--while I bedew them with my tears. Those tears will not sully
them like my blood."

"Maiden," said Sybil, endeavoring to withdraw her hand, "let go your
hold--your sand is run."

"Mercy!"

"It is in vain. Close your eyes."

"No, I will fix them on you thus--you cannot strike then. I will cling
to you--embrace you. Your nature is not cruel--your soul is full of
pity. It melts--those tears--you will be merciful. You cannot
deliberately kill me."

"I cannot--I cannot!" said Sybil, with a passionate outburst of grief.
"Take your life on one condition."

"Name it."

"That you wed Sir Luke Rookwood."

"Ah!" exclaimed Eleanor, "all rushes back upon me at that name; the
whole of that fearful scene passes in review before me."

"Do you reject my proposal?"

"I dare not."

"I must have your oath. Swear by every hope of eternity that you will
wed none other than him."

"By every hope, I swear it."

"Handassah, you will bear this maiden's oath in mind, and witness its
fulfilment."

"I will," replied the gipsy girl, stepping forward from a recess, in
which she had hitherto remained unnoticed.

"Enough. I am satisfied. Tarry with me. Stir not--scream not, whatever
you may see or hear. Your life depends upon your firmness. When I am no
more----"

"No more?" echoed Eleanor, in horror.

"Be calm," said Sybil. "When I am dead, clap your hands together. They
will come to seek you--they will find me in your stead. Then rush to
him--to Sir Luke Rookwood. He will protect you. Say to him hereafter
that I died for the wrong I did him--that I died, and blessed him."

"Can you not live, and save me?" sobbed Eleanor.

"Ask it not. While I live, your life is in danger. When I am gone, none
will seek to harm you. Fare you well! Remember your oath, and you, too,
remember it, Handassah. Remember also--ha! that groan!"

All started, as a deep groan knelled in their ears.

"Whence comes that sound?" cried Sybil. "Hist!--a voice?"

"It is that of the priest," cried Eleanor. "Hark! he groans. They have
murdered him! Kind Heaven, receive his soul!"

"Pray for me," cried Sybil: "pray fervently; avert your face; down on
your knees--down--down! Farewell, Handassah!" And breaking from them,
she rushed into the darkest recesses of the vault.

We must now quit this painful scene for another scarcely less painful,
and return to the unfortunate priest.

Checkley had been brought before the body of Susan Rookwood. Even in the
gloom, the shimmer of the white cereclothes, and the pallid features of
the corpse, were ghastly enough. The torchlight made them terrible.

"Kneel!" said Alan Rookwood. The priest complied. Alan knelt beside him.

"Do you know these features?" demanded he. "Regard them well. Fix your
eyes full upon them. Do you know them?"

"I do."

"Place your hand upon her breast. Does not the flesh creep and shrink
beneath your touch? Now raise your hand--make the cross of your faith
upon her bosom. By that faith you swear you are innocent."

"I do," returned the priest; "are you now satisfied?"

"No," replied Alan. "Let the torch be removed. Your innocence must be
more deeply attested," continued he, as the light was withdrawn. "This
proof will not fail. Entwine your fingers round her throat."

"Have I not done enough?"

"Your hesitation proves your guilt," said Alan.

"That proof is wanting, then?" returned the priest; "my hand is upon her
throat--what more?"

"As you hope for mercy in your hour of need, swear that you never
conspired against her life, or refused her mercy."

"I swear it."

"May the dead convict you of perjury if you have forsworn yourself,"
said Alan; "you are free. Take away your hand!"

"Ha! what is this?" exclaimed the priest. "You have put some jugglery
upon me. I cannot withdraw my hand. It sticks to her throat, as though
'twere glued by blood. Tear me away. I have not force enough to liberate
myself. Why do you grin at me? The corpse grins likewise. It is
jugglery. I am innocent. You would take away my life. Tear me away, I
say: the veins rise; they blacken; they are filling with new blood. I
feel them swell; they coil like living things around my fingers. She is
alive."

"And you are innocent?"

"I am--I am. Let not my ravings convict me. For Jesu's sake, release
me."

"Blaspheme not, but arise. I hold you not."

"You do," groaned the priest. "Your grasp tightens round my throat; your
hard and skinny fingers are there--I strangle--help!"

"Your own fears strangle you. My hand is at my side," returned Alan
calmly.

"Villain, you lie. Your grasp is like a vice. The strength of a thousand
devils is in your hand. Will none lend help? I never pressed so hard.
Your daughter never suffered this torture--never--never. I
choke--choke--oh!" And the priest rolled heavily backwards.

There was a deep groan; a convulsive rattle in the throat; and all was
still.

"He is dead--strangled," cried several voices, holding down the torch.
The face of the priest was blackened and contorted; his eyeballs
protruded from their sockets; his tongue was nearly bitten through in
the desperate efforts he had made to release himself from Alan's gripe;
his hair was erect with horror. It was a ghastly sight.

A murmur arose amongst the gipsies. Barbara deemed it prudent to appease
them.

"He was guilty," cried she. "He was the murderer of Susan Rookwood."

"And I, _her father_, have avenged her," said Alan, sternly.

The dreadful silence that followed this speech was broken by the report
of a pistol. The sound, though startling, was felt almost as a relief.

"We are beset," cried Alan. "Some of you fly to reconnoitre."

"To your posts," cried Barbara.

Several of the crew flocked to the entrance.

"Unbind the prisoners," shouted Alan.

Mrs. Mowbray and Luke were accordingly set free.

Two almost simultaneous reports of a pistol were now heard.

"'Tis Ranulph Rookwood," said Alan; "that was the preconcerted signal."

"Ranulph Rookwood," echoed Eleanor, who caught the exclamation: "he
comes to save me."

"Remember your oath," gasped a dying voice. "He is no longer yours."

"Alas! alas!" sobbed Eleanor, tremblingly.

A moment afterwards a faint clapping of hands reached the ears of
Barbara.

"All is over," muttered she.

"Ha!" exclaimed Alan Rookwood, with a frightful look. "Is it done?"

Barbara motioned him towards the further end of the vault.