_THE FUNERAL_

    How like a silent stream, shaded by night,
    And gliding softly with our windy sighs,
    Moves the whole frame of this solemnity!
    Tears, sighs, and blacks, filling the simile!
    Whilst I, the only murmur in this grove
    Of death, thus hollowly break forth.

                                                    _The Fatal Dowry._


Word being given that the funeral train was fast approaching, the church
door was thrown open, and the assemblage divided in two lines, to allow
it admission.

Meanwhile, a striking change had taken place, even in this brief period,
in the appearance of the night. The sky, heretofore curtained with
darkness, was now illumined by a serene, soft moon, which, floating in a
watery halo, tinged with silvery radiance the edges of a few ghostly
clouds that hurried along the deep and starlit skies. The suddenness of
the change could not fail to excite surprise and admiration, mingled
with regret that the procession had not been delayed until the present
time.

Slowly and mournfully the train was seen to approach the churchyard,
winding, two by two, with melancholy step, around the corner of the
road. First came Dr. Small; then the mutes, with their sable panoply;
next, the torch-bearers; next, those who sustained the coffin, bending
beneath their ponderous burden, followed by Sir Ranulph and a long line
of attendants, all plainly to be distinguished by the flashing
torchlight. There was a slight halt at the gate, and the coffin changed
supporters.

"Ill luck betide them!" ejaculated Peter; "could they find no other
place except that to halt at? Must Sir Piers be gatekeeper till next
Yule! No," added he, seeing what followed; "it will be poor Toft, after
all."

Following close upon the coffin came a rude shell, containing, as Peter
rightly conjectured, the miserable remains of Simon Toft, who had met
his fate in the manner described by Plant. The bolt of death glanced
from the tree which it first struck, and reduced the unfortunate farmer
to a heap of dust. Universal consternation prevailed, and doubts were
entertained as to what course should be pursued. It was judged best by
Dr. Small to remove the remains at once to the charnel-house. Thus
"unanointed, unaneled, with all his imperfections on his head," was poor
Simon Toft, in one brief second, in the twinkling of an eye, plunged
from the height of festivity to the darkness of the grave, and so
horribly disfigured, that scarce a vestige of humanity was discernible
in the mutilated mass that remained of him. Truly may we be said to walk
in blindness, and amidst deep pitfalls.

The churchyard was thronged by the mournful train. The long array of
dusky figures--the waving torchlight gleaming ruddily in the white
moonshine--now glistening upon the sombre habiliments of the bearers,
and on their shrouded load, now reflected upon the jagged branches of
the yew-trees, or falling upon the ivied buttresses of the ancient
church, constituted no unimpressive picture. Over all, like a lamp hung
in the still sky, shone the moon, shedding a soothing, spiritual lustre
over the scene.

The organ broke into a solemn strain as the coffin was borne along the
mid-aisle--the mourners following, with reverent step, and slow. It was
deposited near the mouth of the vault, the whole assemblage circling
around it. Dr. Small proceeded with the performance of that magnificent
service appointed for the burial of the dead, in a tone as remarkable
for its sadness as for its force and fervor. There was a tear in every
eye--a cloud on every brow.

Brightly illumined as was the whole building, there were still some
recesses which, owing to the intervention of heavy pillars, were thrown
into shade; and in one of these, supported by her mother and brother,
stood Eleanor, a weeping witness of the scene. She beheld the coffin
silently borne along; she saw one dark figure slowly following; she knew
those pale features--oh, how pale they were! A year had wrought a
fearful alteration; she could scarce credit what she beheld. He must,
indeed, have suffered--deeply suffered; and her heart told her that his
sorrows had been for her.

Many a wistful look, besides, was directed to the principal figure in
this ceremonial, Ranulph Rookwood. He was a prey to unutterable anguish
of soul; his heart bled inwardly for the father he had lost.
Mechanically following the body down the aisle, he had taken his station
near it, gazing with confused vision upon the bystanders; had listened,
with a sad composure, to the expressive delivery of Small, until he
read--"_For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in
vain; he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them._"

"Verily!" exclaimed a deep voice; and Ranulph, looking round, met the
eyes of Peter Bradley fixed full upon him. But it was evidently not the
sexton who had spoken.

Small continued the service. He arrived at this verse: "_Thou hast set
our misdeeds before thee; and our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance._"

"Even so!" exclaimed the voice; and as Ranulph raised his eyes in the
direction of the sound, he thought he saw a dark figure, muffled in a
cloak, disappear behind one of the pillars. He bestowed, however, at the
moment, little thought upon this incident. His heart melted within him;
and leaning his face upon his hand, he wept aloud.

"Command yourself, I entreat of you, my dear Sir Ranulph," said Dr.
Small, as soon as the service was finished, "and suffer this melancholy
ceremonial to be completed." Saying which, he gently withdrew Ranulph
from his support, and the coffin was lowered into the vault.

Ranulph remained for some time in the extremity of sorrow. When he in
part recovered, the crowd had dispersed, and few persons were remaining
within the church; yet near him stood three apparent loiterers. They
advanced towards him. An exclamation of surprise and joy burst from his
lips.

"Eleanor!"

"Ranulph!"

"Is it possible? Do I indeed behold you, Eleanor?"

No other word was spoken. They rushed into each other's arms. Oh!
sad--sad is the lover's parting--no pang so keen; but if life hath a
zest more exquisite than others--if felicity hath one drop more racy
than the rest in her honeyed cup, it is the happiness enjoyed in such a
union as the present. To say that he was as one raised from the depths
of misery by some angel comforter, were a feeble comparison of the
transport of Ranulph. To paint the thrilling delight of Eleanor--the
trembling tenderness--the fond abandonment which vanquished all her
maiden scruples, would be impossible. Reluctantly yielding--fearing, yet
complying, her lips were sealed in one long, loving kiss, the
sanctifying pledge of their tried affection.

"Eleanor, dear Eleanor," exclaimed Ranulph, "though I hold you within my
arms--though each nerve within my frame assures me of your
presence--though I look into those eyes, which seem fraught with greater
endearment than ever I have known them wear--though I see and feel and
know all this, so sudden, so unlooked for is the happiness, that I could
almost doubt its reality. Say to what blessed circumstance I am indebted
for this unlooked-for happiness."

"We are staying not far hence, with friends, dear Ranulph; and my
mother, hearing of Sir Piers Rookwood's death, and wishing to bury all
animosity with him, resolved to be present at the sad ceremony. We were
told you could not be here."

"And would my presence have prevented your attendance, Eleanor?"

"Not that, dear Ranulph; but----"

"But what?"

At this moment the advance of Mrs. Mowbray offered an interruption to
their further discourse.

"My son and I appear to be secondary in your regards, Sir Ranulph," said
she, gravely.

"_Sir_ Ranulph!" mentally echoed the young man. "What will _she_ think
when she knows that that title is not mine? I dread to tell her." He
then added aloud, with a melancholy smile, "I crave your pardon, madam;
the delight of a meeting so unexpected with your daughter must plead my
apology."

"None is wanting, Sir Ranulph," said Major Mowbray. "I who have known
what separation from my sister is, can readily excuse your feelings. But
you look ill."

"I have, indeed, experienced much mental anxiety," said Ranulph, looking
at Eleanor; "it is now past, and I would fain hope that a brighter day
is dawning." His heart answered, 'twas but a hope.

"You were unlooked for here to-night, Sir Ranulph," said Mrs. Mowbray;
"by us, at least: we were told you were abroad."

"You were rightly informed, madam," replied Ranulph. "I only arrived
this evening from Bordeaux."

"I am glad you are returned. We are at present on a visit with your
neighbors, the Davenhams, at Braybrook, and trust we shall see you
there."

"I will ride over to-morrow," replied Ranulph; "there is much on which I
would consult you all. I would have ventured to request the favor of
your company at Rookwood, had the occasion been other than the present."

"And I would willingly have accepted your invitation," returned Mrs.
Mowbray; "I should like to see the old house once more. During your
father's lifetime I could not approach it. You are lord of broad lands,
Sir Ranulph--a goodly inheritance."

"Madam!"

"And a proud title, which you will grace well, I doubt not. The first,
the noblest of our house, was he from whom you derive your name. You are
the third Sir Ranulph; the first founded the house of Rookwood; the next
advanced it; 'tis for you to raise its glory to its height."

"Alas! madam, I have no such thought."

"Wherefore not? you are young, wealthy, powerful. With such domains as
those of Rookwood--with such a title as its lord can claim, naught
should be too high for your aspirations."

"I aspire to nothing, madam, but your daughter's hand; and even that I
will not venture to solicit until you are acquainted with----" And he
hesitated.

"With what?" asked Mrs. Mowbray, in surprise.

"A singular, and to me most perplexing event has occurred to-night,"
replied Ranulph, "which may materially affect my future fortunes."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mrs. Mowbray. "Does it relate to your mother?"

"Excuse my answering the question now, madam," replied Ranulph; "you
shall know all to-morrow."

"Ay, to-morrow, dear Ranulph," said Eleanor; "and whatever that morrow
may bring forth, it will bring happiness to me, if you are bearer of the
tidings."

"I shall expect your coming with impatience," said Mrs. Mowbray.

"And I," added Major Mowbray, who had listened thus far in silence,
"would offer you my services in any way you think they would be useful.
Command me as you think fitting."

"I thank you heartily," returned Ranulph. "To-morrow you shall learn
all. Meanwhile, it shall be my business to investigate the truth or
falsehood of the statement I have heard, ere I report it to you. Till
then, farewell."

As they issued from the church it was gray dawn. Mrs. Mowbray's carriage
stood at the door. The party entered it; and accompanied by Dr. Small,
whom he found within in the vestry, Ranulph walked towards the hall,
where a fresh surprise awaited him.