_A SURPRISE_

    Was this well done, Jenny?--_Captain Macheath._


While Turpin and King are walking across the bowling-green, we will see
what has taken place outside the inn. Tom's presentiments of danger were
not, it appeared, without foundation. Scarcely had the ostler brought
forth our two highwaymen's steeds, when a post-chaise, escorted by two
or three horsemen, drove furiously up to the door. The sole occupant of
the carriage was a lady, whose slight and pretty figure was all that
could be distinguished, her face being closely veiled. The landlord, who
was busied in casting up Turpin's account, rushed forth at the summons.
A word or two passed between him and the horsemen, upon which the
former's countenance fell. He posted in the direction of the garden; and
the horsemen instantly dismounted.

"We have him now, sure enough," said one of them, a very small man, who
looked, in his boots, like Buckle equipped for the Oaks.

"By the powers! I begin to think so," replied the other horseman. "But
don't spoil all, Mr. Coates, by being too precipitate."

"Never fear that, Mr. Tyrconnel," said Coates; for it was the gallant
attorney: "he's sure to come for his mare. That's a _trap_ certain to
catch him, eh, Mr. Paterson? With the chief constable of Westminster to
back us, the devil's in it if we are not a match for him."

"And for Tom King, too," replied the chief constable; "since his
blowen's peached, the game's up with him, too. We've long had an eye
upon him, and now we'll have a finger. He's one of your dashing trouts
to whom we always give a long line, but we'll _land_ him this time,
anyhow. If you'll look after Dick Turpin, gemmen, I'll make sure of
Tom."

"I'd rather you would help _us_, Mr. Paterson," said Coates; "never mind
Tom King; another time will do for him."

"No such thing," said Paterson; "one _weighs_ just as much for that
matter as t'other. I'll take Tom to myself, and surely you two, with the
landlord and ostler, can manage Turpin amongst you."

"I don't know that," said Coates, doubtfully; "he's a devil of a fellow
to deal with."

"Take him quietly," said Paterson. "Draw the chaise out of the way, lad.
Take our tits to one side, and place their nags near the door, ostler.
Shall you be able to see him, ma'am, where you are?" asked the chief
constable, walking to the carriage, and touching his hat to the lady
within. Having received a satisfactory nod from the bonnet and veil, he
returned to his companions. "And now, gemmen," added he, "let's step
aside a little. Don't use your fire-arms too soon."

As if conscious of what was passing around her, and of the danger that
awaited her master, Black Bess exhibited so much impatience, and plunged
so violently, that it was with difficulty the ostler could hold her.
"The devil's in the mare," said he; "what's the matter with her? She was
quiet enough a few minutes since. Soho! lass, stand."

Turpin and King, meanwhile, walked quickly through the house, preceded
by the host, who conducted them, and not without some inward
trepidation, towards the door. Arrived there, each man rushed swiftly to
his horse. Dick was in the saddle in an instant, and stamping her foot
on the ostler's leg, Black Bess compelled the man, yelling with pain, to
quit his hold of the bridle. Tom King was not equally fortunate. Before
he could mount his horse, a loud shout was raised, which startled the
animal, and caused him to swerve, so that Tom lost his footing in the
stirrup, and fell to the ground. He was instantly seized by Paterson,
and a struggle commenced, King endeavoring, but in vain, to draw a
pistol.

"Flip him,[108] Dick; fire, or I'm taken," cried King. "Fire! damn you,
why don't you fire?" shouted he, in desperation, still struggling
vehemently with Paterson, who was a strong man, and more than a match
for a light weight like King.

"I can't," cried Dick; "I shall hit you, if I fire."

"Take your chance," shouted King. "Is _this_ your friendship?"

Thus urged, Turpin fired. The ball ripped up the sleeve of Paterson's
coat, but did not wound him.

"Again!" cried King. "Shoot him, I say. Don't you hear me? Fire again!"

Pressed as he was by foes on every side, himself their mark, for both
Coates and Tyrconnel had fired upon him, and were now mounting their
steeds to give chase, it was impossible that Turpin could take sure aim;
added to which, in the struggle, Paterson and King were each moment
changing their relative positions. He, however, would no longer
hesitate, but again, at his friend's request, fired. The ball lodged
itself in King's breast! He fell at once. At this instant a shriek was
heard from the chaise: the window was thrown open, and her thick veil
being drawn aside, the features of a very pretty female, now impressed
with terror and contrition, were suddenly exhibited.

King fixed his glazing eyes upon her.

"Susan!" sighed he, "is it you that I behold?"

"Yes, yes, 'tis she, sure enough," said Paterson. "You see, ma'am, what
you and such like have brought him to. However, you'll lose your reward;
he's going fast enough."

"Reward!" gasped King; "reward! Did she betray me?"

"Ay, ay, sir," said Paterson, "she blowed the gaff, if it's any
consolation to you to know it."

"Consolation!" repeated the dying man; "perfidious!--oh!--the
prophecy--my best friend--Turpin--I die by his hand."

And vainly striving to raise himself, he fell backwards and expired.
Alas, poor Tom!

"Mr. Paterson! Mr. Paterson!" cried Coates; "leave the landlord to look
after the body of that dying ruffian, and mount with us in pursuit of
the living rascal. Come, sir; quick! mount! despatch! You see he is
yonder; he seems to hesitate; we shall have him now."

"Well, gemmen, I'm ready," said Paterson; "but how the devil came you to
let him escape?"

"Saint Patrick only knows!" said Titus; "he's as slippery as an
eel--and, like a cat, turn him which way you will, he is always sure to
alight upon his legs. I wouldn't wonder but we lose him now, after all,
though he has such a small start. That mare flies like the wind."

"He shall have a tight run for it, at all events," said Paterson,
putting spurs into his horse. "I've got a good nag under me, and you are
neither of you badly mounted. He's only three hundred yards before us,
and the devil's in it if we can't run him down. It's a three hundred
pound job, Mr. Coates, and well worth a race."

"You shall have another hundred from me, sir, if you take him," said
Coates, urging his steed forward.

"Thank you, sir, thank you. Follow my directions, and we'll make sure of
him," said the constable. "Gently, gently, not so fast up the hill--you
see he's breathing his horse. All in good time, Mr. Coates--all in good
time, sir."

And maintaining an equal distance, both parties cantered leisurely up
the ascent now called Windmill Hill. We shall now return to Turpin.

Aghast at the deed he had accidentally committed, Dick remained for a
few moments irresolute; he perceived that King was mortally wounded, and
that all attempts at rescue would be fruitless; he perceived, likewise,
that Jerry and the Magus had effected their escape from the
bowling-green, as he could detect their figures stealing along the
hedge-side. He hesitated no longer. Turning his horse, he galloped
slowly off, little heeding the pursuit with which he was threatened.

"Every bullet has its billet," said Dick; "but little did I think that I
really should turn poor Tom's executioner. To the devil with this
rascally snapper," cried he, throwing the pistol over the hedge. "I
could never have used it again. 'Tis strange, too, that he should have
foretold his own fate--devilish strange! And then that he should have
been betrayed by the very blowen he trusted! that's a lesson, if I
wanted any. But trust a woman!--not I, the length of my little finger."


[108] Shoot him.