_THE DOWER OF SYBIL_

    _Card._ Now art thou come? Thou look'st ghastly;
            There sits in thy face some great determination,
            Mixed with some fear.

    _Bos._  Thus it lightens into action:
            I am come to kill thee.

                                                   _Duchess of Malfy._


Ranulph Rookwood was for some moments so much stunned by the ghastly
fate of Agnes, connected, as it appeared to be, with a supernatural
summons similar to that which he imagined he had himself received, that
he was incapable of stirring from the spot, or removing his gaze from
the rigid features of the corpse, which, even in death, wore the strong
impress of horror and despair. Through life he knew that Agnes, his own
nurse, had been his mother's constant and faithful attendant; the
unhesitating agent of her schemes, and it was to be feared, from the
remorse she had exhibited, the participator of her crimes; and Ranulph
felt, he knew not why, that in having witnessed her terrible end, he
beheld the ultimate condition of his own parent. Conquering, not without
great effort, the horror which had riveted him to the spot, he turned to
look towards Eleanor. She had sunk upon a chair, a silent witness of the
scene, Mrs. Mowbray and Dr. Small having, upon the first alarm given by
Agnes respecting Lady Rookwood's departure from the house quitted the
room to ascertain the truth of her statement. Ranulph immediately flew
to Eleanor.

"Ranulph," said she, though almost overcome by her alarm, "stay not an
instant here with me. I am sure, from that poor woman's dreadful death,
that something terrible has occurred, perhaps to Lady Rookwood. Go to
her chamber. Tarry not, I entreat of you."

"But will you, can you remain here alone with that body?" asked Ranulph.

"I shall not be alone. Handassah is within call--nay, she is here. Oh,
what an eve of our espousals has this been, dear Ranulph. Our whole life
is a troubled volume, of which each successive leaf grows darker. Fate
is opposed to us. It is useless to contend with our destiny. I fear we
shall never be united."

"Dismiss me not with words like those, dear Eleanor," returned Ranulph.
"Fate cannot have greater woes in store for us than those by which we
are now opposed. Let us hope that we are now at that point whence all
must brighten. Once possessed of you, assured of thus much happiness, I
would set even fate at defiance. And you will be mine to-morrow."

"Ranulph, dear Ranulph, your suit at this moment is desperate. I dare
not, cannot pledge myself. You yourself heard, even now, my mother's
sentiments, and I cannot marry without her consent."

"Your mother, like my own, regards not the feelings of her children.
Forgive my boldness, Eleanor; forgive me if I linger now, when duty
calls me hence; but I cannot tear myself away. Your mother may
return--my hopes be crushed; for even your love for me seems annihilated
in her presence."

"Ranulph, your vehemence terrifies me," rejoined Eleanor. "I implore
you, by the tender affection which you know I bear you, not to urge me
further at this moment. Recall your firmer feelings, and obtain some
mastery over yourself. I repeat, I am yours only, if I am bride of any
one. But when our union can take place rests not with myself. And now, I
entreat of you, leave me."

"You are mine," said Ranulph, with fervor; "mine only."

"Yours only," replied Eleanor.

"Be this the earnest of my happiness!" exclaimed Ranulph, imprinting a
long and impassioned kiss upon her lips.

The lovers were startled from their embrace by a profound sigh; it
proceeded from Handassah, who, unbidden, had replaced the picture of the
Lady Eleanor upon its frame. The augury seemed sinister. Every one who
has gazed steadfastly upon a portrait must have noticed the peculiar and
lifelike character which, under certain aspects, the eyes will assume.
Seen by the imperfect light upon the table, the whole character of the
countenance of the Lady Eleanor seemed changed; the features appeared to
be stamped with melancholy, and the eyes to be fixed with pitying
tenderness upon her descendants. Both gazed at each other and at the
picture, struck with the same sentiment of undefined awe. Beside them
stood the dark figure of the gipsy girl, watching, with ill-concealed
satisfaction, the effect of her handiwork. Ranulph was aroused from his
abstraction by hearing a loud outcry in Mrs. Mowbray's voice. Hastily
committing Eleanor to the care of her attendant, he left the room.
Handassah followed him to the door, closed it after him, and then locked
it within side. This done, she walked back hastily towards Eleanor,
exclaiming, in a tone of exultation, "You have parted with him forever."

"What mean you, girl?" cried Eleanor, alarmed at her manner. "Why have
you fastened the door? Open it, I command you."

"Command _me_!" laughed Handassah, scornfully. "What if I refuse your
mandate? What, if, in my turn, I bid _you_ obey _me_? I never owned but
one mistress. If I have bowed my neck to you for a time, 'twas to fulfil
her dying wishes. If I have submitted to your control, it was to
accomplish what I have now accomplished. Your oath! Remember your oath.
The hour is come for its fulfilment."

With these words Handassah clapped her hands. A panel in the wall
opened, and Luke stood suddenly before them. Silently and with stern
deliberation he strode towards Eleanor, and seizing one of her hands,
drew her forcibly towards him. Eleanor resisted not; she had not the
power; neither did she scream, for so paralyzing was her terror, that
for the moment it took away all power of utterance. Luke neither stirred
nor spoke, but, still maintaining his hold, gazed searchingly upon her
features, while Eleanor, as if spell-bound, could not withdraw her eyes
from him. Nothing more terribly impressive could be conceived than
Luke's whole appearance. Harassed and exhausted by the life he had
recently led; deprived almost of natural rest; goaded by remorse, his
frame was almost worn to the bone, while his countenance, once dark and
swarthy, was now blanched and colorless as marble. This pallid and
deathlike hue was, in all probability, owing to the loss of blood he had
sustained from the wound inflicted by Major Mowbray, with the stains of
which his apparel was dyed; for, though staunched, the effusion had been
sufficient to cause great faintness. His dark eyes blazed with their
wonted fire--nay, they looked darker and larger from his exceeding
paleness, and such intense mental and bodily suffering was imprinted
upon his countenance, that, despite its fierceness and desperation, few
could have regarded him without sympathy. Real desperation has so much
of agony in its character, that no one can witness it unmoved. His garb
was not that in which the reader first beheld him, but a rich, dark,
simple suit of velvet, corresponding more with his real rank in life
than his former peasant's attire; but it was disordered by his recent
conflict, and stained with bloody testimonials of the fray; while his
long, sable curls, once his pride and ornament, now hung in intertangled
elf-locks, like a coil of wreathed water-snakes. Even in her terror, as
she dwelt upon his noble features, Eleanor could not help admitting that
she beheld the undoubted descendant, and the living likeness of the
handsomest and most distinguished of her house--the profligate and
criminal Sir Reginald. As her eye, mechanically following this train of
thought, wandered for an instant to the haughty portraiture of Sir
Reginald, which formed part of the family pictures, and thence to those
of his unfortunate lady, she was struck with the fancy that, by some
terrible fatality, the tragic horrors of bygone days were to be again
enacted in their persons, and that they were in some way strangely
identified with their unfortunate progenitors. So forcibly was this idea
impressed upon her features that Luke, who had followed the direction of
her glances, became instantly aware of it. Drawing her nearer to the
portrait of the Lady Eleanor, he traced the resemblance in mute wonder;
thence, turning towards that of Sir Reginald, he proudly exclaimed: "You
doubted once my lineage, maiden--can you gaze on those features, which
would almost seem to be a reflection of mine own, and longer hesitate
whose descendant I am? I glory in my likeness. There is a wild delight
in setting human emotions at naught, which he was said to feel--which I
feel now. Within these halls I seem to breathe an atmosphere congenial
to me. I visit what I oft have visited in my dreams; or as in a state of
pre-existence. Methinks, as I gaze on you, I could almost deem myself
Sir Reginald, and you his bride, the Lady Eleanor. Our fates were
parallel: _she_ was united to her lord by ties of hatred--by a _vow_--_a
bridal vow_! So are you to me. And she could ne'er escape him--could
ne'er throw off her bondage--nor shall you. I claim the fulfilment of
_your_ oath; you are _mine_."

"Never, never!" shrieked Eleanor, struggling to disengage herself. But
Luke laughed at her feeble efforts. Handassah stood by, a passive
spectatress of the scene, with her arms folded upon her bosom.

"You refuse compliance," said Luke, scornfully. "Have you no hopes of
Heaven, no fears of perdition, that you dare to violate your vow?
Bethink you of the awful nature of that obligation; of the life that was
laid down to purchase it; of the blood which will cry out for vengeance
'gainst the _murderess_, should you hesitate. By that blood-cemented
sacrament, I claim you as my own. You are mine." And he dragged her
towards the opening.

Eleanor uttered a long and terrific scream.

"Be silent, on your life," added he, searching for the dagger given to
him by Alan Rookwood, when, as his hand sought the weapon, Eleanor
escaped from his grasp, and fled towards the door. But Handassah had
anticipated her intention. The key was withdrawn from the lock, and the
wretched maiden vainly tried to open it.

At this instant Turpin appeared at the sliding panel.

"Quick, quick!" cried he, impatiently--"despatch, in the devil's name.
The house is alarmed. I hear young Ranulph's voice in the gallery."

"Ranulph!" shrieked Eleanor--"then I am saved," and she redoubled her
outcries for assistance.

Luke again seized his victim. Her hands clutched so convulsively fast in
her despairing energy against the handle of the door that he could not
tear her thence. By this time Ranulph Rookwood, who had caught her
reiterated screams for help, was at the entrance. He heard her
struggles; he heard Luke's threats--his mockery--his derisive
laughter--but vainly, vainly did he attempt to force it open. It was of
the strongest oak, and the bolts resisted all his efforts. A board alone
divided him from his mistress. He could hear her sobs and gasps. He saw,
from the action of the handle, with what tenacity she clung to it; and,
stung to frenzy by the sight, he hurled himself against the sturdy
plank, but all in vain. At length the handle was still. There was a
heavy fall upon the floor--a stifled scream--and a sound as of a body
being dragged along. The thought was madness.

"To the panel! to the panel!" cried a voice--it was that of Turpin--from
within.

"The panel!--ha!" echoed Ranulph, with a sudden gleam of hope. "I may
yet save her." And he darted along the corridor with the swiftness of
thought.

Luke, meanwhile, had for some minutes fruitlessly exhausted all his
force to drag Eleanor from the door. Despair gave her strength; she
clutched at the door; but she felt her strength failing her--her grasp
was relaxing. And then the maddening thought that she would be shortly
his--that he would slay her--while the idea that Ranulph was so near,
and yet unable to protect her, added gall even to her bitterness. With
savage delight Luke exulted in the lovers' tortures. He heard Ranulph's
ineffectual attempts; he heard his groans; he heard their mutual cries.
Inflamed by jealousy, he triumphed in his power of vengeance, and even
prolonged the torture which accident had given him the means of
inflicting. He stood like the inquisitor who marks his victim's anguish
on the rack, and calculates his powers of further endurance. But he
could no longer dally, even with this horrible gratification. His
companion grew impatient. Eleanor's fair long tresses had escaped from
their confinement in the struggle, and fell down her neck in disorder.
Twining his fingers amidst its folds, Luke dragged her backwards from
her hold, and, incapable of further resistance, her strength completely
exhausted, the wretched girl fell to the ground.

Luke now raised her almost inanimate form in his arms, and had nigh
reached the aperture, when a crash was heard in the panel opposite to
that by which he was about to escape, and communicating with a further
apartment. It was thrown open, and Ranulph Rookwood presented himself at
the narrow partition. An exclamation of joy, that he was yet in time,
escaped his lips; and he was about to clear the partition at a bound,
and to precipitate himself upon Luke, when, as suddenly as his own
action, was the person of the unfortunate Mr. Coates wedged into the
aperture.

"Traitor!" cried Ranulph, regarding Coates with concentrated fury, "dare
you to oppose me?--hence! or, by Heaven, I will cut you down!"

"'Tis impossible," ejaculated the attorney. "For your own sake, Sir
Ranulph--for my sake--I entreat--implore of you--not to attempt to pass
this way. Try the other door."

Ranulph said no more. He passed his sword through the body of the
miserable attorney, who, with a deep groan, fell. The only obstacle to
his passage being thus removed, he at once leaped into the room.

The brothers were now confronted, together, but little of brotherly love
mingled with the glances which they threw upon each other. Ranulph's
gentle, but withal enthusiastic temperament, had kindled, under his
present excitement, like flax at the sudden approach of flame. He was
wild with frenzy. Luke was calmer, but his fury was deadly and
inextinguishable. The meeting was terrible on both sides.

With one arm Luke enfolded Eleanor, with the other he uplifted the
dagger. Its point was towards her bosom. Scowling grim defiance at
Ranulph, he exclaimed, in a determined tone, "Advance a footstep, and my
dagger descends into her heart."

Ranulph hesitated, uncertain how to act; foaming with rage, yet
trembling with apprehension.

"Ranulph," gasped Eleanor, "life without you were valueless.
Advance--avenge me!"

Ranulph still hesitated. He could not, by any act of his own, compromise
Eleanor's safety.

Luke saw his advantage, and was not slow to profit by it. "You seal her
destruction if you stir," said he.

"Villain," returned Ranulph, between his ground teeth, and with
difficulty commanding sufficient coolness to speak with deliberation,
"you perceive your power. Injure her, and nothing earthly shall protect
you. Free her, and take your life and liberty; nay, reward if you will.
You cannot otherwise escape me."

"Escape you!" laughed Luke, disdainfully. "Stand aside, and let me pass.
Beware," added he, sternly, "how you oppose me. I would not have a
brother's blood upon my soul."

"Nor I," cried Ranulph; "but you pass not." And he placed himself full
in Luke's path.

Luke, however, steadily moved forward, holding Eleanor between himself
and Ranulph, so as to shield his own person; but, fancying he saw an
opportunity of dealing a blow without injury to his mistress, the latter
was about to hazard the thrust, when his arms were seized behind, and he
was rendered powerless.

"Lost, lost," groaned he; "she is lost to me forever!"

"I fear that's but too true," said Turpin, for it was the highwayman
whose grasp confined Ranulph.

"Must I see her borne away before my eyes?" cried Ranulph. "Release
me--set me free!"

"Quite impossible at present," returned Dick. "Mount and away, Sir
Luke," continued he; "never mind me. Leave me to shift for myself."

"Eleanor!" cried Ranulph, as she passed close by his side.

"Ranulph!" shrieked Eleanor, with a loud scream, recalled to
consciousness by his voice, "farewell for ever."

"Ay, for ever," responded Luke, triumphantly. "You meet no more on
earth."

He was about to pass through the panel, when Eleanor exerted all her
remaining strength in a last futile attempt at liberation. In the
struggle, a packet fell from Luke's bosom.

Handassah stooped to pick it up.

"From Sybil!" exclaimed she, glancing at the superscription.

"Remember my promise to old Barbara," roared Dick, who had some
curiosity, as the reader knows, to learn what the package contained.
"The time is arrived. Eleanor is in your power--in your presence."

"Give me the packet," said Luke, resigning Eleanor for the instant to
Handassah's custody--"take the steel, and grasp her firmly."

Handassah, who, though slight of figure, was of singular personal
strength, twined her arms about Miss Mowbray in such a manner as to
preclude all possibility of motion.

Luke tore open the package. It was a box carefully enclosed in several
folds of linen, and lastly within a sheet of paper, on which were
inscribed these words:

    THE DOWER OF SYBIL

Hastily, and with much curiosity, Luke raised the lid of the box. It
contained one long silken tress of blackest hair enviously braided. It
was Sybil's. His first impulse was to cast it from him; his next,
reproachfully to raise it to his lips. He started as if a snake had
stung him.

At this moment a loud clamor was heard in the gallery. In the next, the
door was assailed by violent strokes, evidently proceeding from some
weighty instrument, impelled by the united strength of several
assailants.

The voice of Turpin rose above the deafening din. "A bullet for the
first who enters," shouted he. "Quick, Sir Luke, and the prize is
safe--away, and----"

But as he seconded his exhortation with a glance at Luke, he broke off
the half-uttered sentence, and started with horror and amazement. Ere
the cause of his alarm could be expressed, the door was burst open, and
a crowd of domestics, headed by Major Mowbray and Titus Tyrconnel,
rushed into the room.

"Nay, then, the game's up!" exclaimed Dick; "I have done with Rookwood."
And, springing through the panel, he was seen no more.

When the newcomers first looked round, they could perceive only two
figures besides themselves--those of the two lovers--Eleanor having
sunk pale, exhausted, and almost senseless, into the arms of Ranulph.
Presently, however, a ghastly object attracted their attention. All
rushed towards it--all recoiled, as soon as they discovered that it was
the lifeless body of Luke Rookwood. His limbs were stiff, like those of
a corpse which has for hours been such; his eyes protruded from their
sockets; his face was livid and blotched. All bespoke, with terrible
certainty, the efficacy of the poison, and the full accomplishment of
Barbara's revenge.

Handassah was gone. Probably she had escaped ere Turpin fled. At all
events, she was heard of no more at Rookwood.

It required little to recall the senses of Eleanor. Shortly she revived,
and as she gazed around, and became conscious of her escape, she uttered
exclamations of thanksgiving, and sank into the embraces of her brother.

Meanwhile, Mrs. Mowbray and Dr. Small had joined the assemblage.

The worthy doctor had been full of alarm; but his meditated condolences
were now changed to congratulations, as he heard the particulars of the
terrible scene that had occurred, and of Eleanor's singular and almost
providential deliverance.

"After what has befallen, madam," said the doctor to Mrs. Mowbray,
slightly coughing, "you can no longer raise any objection to a certain
union, eh?"

"I will answer for my mother in that particular," said Major Mowbray,
stepping forward.

"She will answer for herself, my son," said Mrs. Mowbray. "The match has
her full and entire consent. But to what am I to attribute the
unexpected happiness of your return?"

"To a chain of singular circumstances," replied the Major, "which I will
hereafter detail to you. Suffice it to say, that but for this
gentleman's fortunate arrival," added he, looking at Titus Tyrconnel,
"at the hut on Thorne Waste, I might have been detained a prisoner,
without _parole_, and, what is worse, without provision perhaps for
days; and to add to my distress, fully acquainted with the meditated
abduction of my sister. It was excessively lucky for me, Mr. Tyrconnel,
that you happened to pass that way, and for poor Paterson likewise."

"Arrah, by my sowl, major, and you may say that with safety; and it was
particularly fortunate that we stumbled upon the tits in the cellar, or
we'd never have been here just in the nick of it. I begin to think we've
lost all chance of taking Dick Turpin this time. He's got clean away."

"I am not sorry for his escape," said the major. "He's a brave fellow;
and I respect courage wherever I find it, even in a highwayman. I should
be sorry to appear as a witness against him; and I trust it will never
be my fate to do so."

We shall not pause to describe the affectionate meeting which now ensued
between the brother and sister--the congratulations upon Eleanor's
escape from peril, intermingled with the tenderest embraces, and the
warmest thanks offered to Ranulph for his gallant service. "She is
yours, my dear boy," said the major; "and though you are a Rookwood, and
she bears the ill-fated name of Eleanor, I predict that, contrary to the
usual custom of our families in such cases, all your misfortunes will
have occurred _before_ marriage."

"There is only one thing," said Small, with a very peculiar expression,
which might almost be construed into serio-comic, could we suspect the
benevolent doctor of any such waggery, "that can possibly throw a shade
over our present felicity. Lady Rookwood is not to be found."

"My poor mother," said Ranulph, starting.

"Make yourself easy," said the doctor; "I doubt not we shall hear of her
to-morrow. My only apprehension," added he, half aside, "is, that she
may be heard of before."

"One other circumstance afflicts me," said Ranulph. "Poor Mr. Coates!"

"What's that you say of Mr. Coates, Sir Ranulph?" exclaimed Titus.

"I fear he was killed in the recent affray," said Ranulph. "Let some one
search for the body."

"Kilt!" echoed Titus. "Is it kilt that Mr. Coates is? Ah! _ullagone_,
and is it over with him entirely? Is he gone to rejoin his father, the
thief-taker? Bring me to his remains."

"He will bring them to you himself," said the attorney, stepping
forward. "Luckily, Sir Ranulph," said the incurable punster, "it was
merely the _outer coats_ that your sword passed through; the _inner_
remains uninjured, so that you did not act as my _conveyancer_ to
eternity. Body o' me! I've as many lives as a cat--ha, ha!"

Ranulph welcomed the facetious man of law with no little satisfaction.

We think it unnecessary to enter into further detail. Another chamber
was prepared for Eleanor's reception, to which she was almost
immediately transported. The remains of the once fierce and haughty
Luke, now stiff and stark, but still wearing, even in death, their proud
character, were placed upon the self-same bier, and covered with the
self-same pall which, but a week ago, had furnished forth his father's
funeral. And as the domestics crowded round the corpse, there was not
one of them but commented upon his startling resemblance to his
grandsire, Sir Reginald; nor, amongst the superstitious, was the falling
of the fatal bough forgotten.

Tranquillity was at length restored at the hall. Throughout the night
and during the next day, Ranulph made every search for his mother, but
no tidings could be learned of her. Seriously alarmed, he then caused
more strict and general inquiry to be instituted, but with like
unsuccessful effect. It was not, indeed, till some years afterwards that
her fate was ascertained.