_THE HUE AND CRY_

    Six gentlemen upon the road
      Thus seeing Gilpin fly,
    With postboy scampering in the rear,
      They raised the hue and cry:

    Stop thief! stop thief! a highwayman!
      Not one of them was mute;
    And all and each that passed that way
      Did join in the pursuit.

                                                        _John Gilpin._


Arrived at the brow of the hill, whence such a beautiful view of the
country surrounding the metropolis is obtained,[109] Turpin turned for
an instant to reconnoitre his pursuers. Coates and Titus he utterly
disregarded; but Paterson was a more formidable foe, and he well knew
that he had to deal with a man of experience and resolution. It was
then, for the first time, that the thoughts of executing his
extraordinary ride to York first flashed across him; his bosom throbbed
high with rapture, and he involuntarily exclaimed aloud, as he raised
himself in the saddle, "By God! I will do it!"

He took one last look at the great Babel that lay buried in a world of
trees beneath him; and as his quick eye ranged over the magnificent
prospect, lit up by that gorgeous sunset, he could not help thinking of
Tom King's last words. "Poor fellow!" thought Dick, "he said truly. He
will never see another sunset." Aroused by the approaching clatter of
his pursuers, Dick struck into a lane which lies on the right of the
road, now called Shoot-up-hill Lane, and set off at a good pace in the
direction of Hampstead.

"Now," cried Paterson, "put your tits to it, my boys. We must not lose
sight of him for a second in these lanes."

Accordingly, as Turpin was by no means desirous of inconveniencing his
mare in this early stage of the business, and as the ground was still
upon an ascent, the parties preserved their relative distances.

At length, after various twistings and turnings in that deep and devious
lane; after scaring one or two farmers, and riding over a brood or two
of ducks; dipping into the verdant valley of West End, and ascending
another hill, Turpin burst upon the gorsy, sandy, and beautiful heath of
Hampstead. Shaping his course to the left, Dick then made for the lower
part of the heath, and skirted a path that leads towards North End,
passing the furze-crowned summit which is now crested by a clump of
lofty pines.

It was here that the chase first assumed a character of interest. Being
open ground, the pursued and pursuers were in full view of each other;
and as Dick rode swiftly across the heath, with the shouting trio hard
at his heels, the scene had a very animated appearance. He crossed the
hill--the Hendon Road--passed Crackskull Common--and dashed along the
cross road to Highgate.

Hitherto no advantage had been gained by the pursuers; they had not lost
ground, but still they had not gained an inch, and much spurring was
required to maintain their position. As they approached Highgate, Dick
slackened his pace, and the other party redoubled their efforts. To
avoid the town, Dick struck into a narrow path at the right, and rode
easily down the hill.

His pursuers were now within a hundred yards, and shouted to him to
stand. Pointing to a gate which seemed to bar their further progress,
Dick unhesitatingly charged it, clearing it in beautiful style. Not so
with Coates's party; and the time they lost in unfastening the gate,
which none of them chose to leap, enabled Dick to put additional space
betwixt them. It did not, however, appear to be his intention altogether
to outstrip his pursuers: the chase seemed to give him excitement, which
he was willing to prolong as much as was consistent with his safety.
Scudding rapidly past Highgate, like a swift-sailing schooner, with
three lumbering Indiamen in her wake, Dick now took the lead along a
narrow lane that threads the fields in the direction of Hornsey. The
shouts of his followers had brought others to join them, and as he
neared Crouch End, traversing the lane which takes its name from Du-Val,
and in which a house frequented by that gayest of robbers stands, or
stood, "A highwayman! a highwayman!" rang in his ears, in a discordant
chorus of many voices.

The whole neighborhood was alarmed by the cries, and by the tramp of
horses: the men of Hornsey rushed into the road to seize the fugitive,
and women held up their babes to catch a glimpse of the flying
cavalcade, which seemed to gain number and animation as it advanced.
Suddenly three horsemen appear in the road--they hear the uproar and the
din. "A highwayman! a highwayman!" cry the voices: "stop him, stop him!"
But it is no such easy matter. With a pistol in each hand, and his
bridle in his teeth, Turpin passed boldly on. His fierce looks--his
furious steed--the impetus with which he pressed forward, bore down all
before him. The horsemen gave way, and only served to swell the list of
his pursuers.

"We have him now--we have him now!" cried Paterson, exultingly. "Shout
for your lives. The turnpike man will hear us. Shout again--again! The
fellow has heard it. The gate is shut. We have him. Ha, ha!"

The old Hornsey toll-bar was a high gate, with chevaux-de-frise on the
upper rail. It may be so still. The gate was swung into its lock, and,
like a tiger in his lair, the prompt custodian of the turnpike trusts,
ensconced within his doorway, held himself in readiness to spring upon
the runaway. But Dick kept steadily on. He coolly calculated the height
of the gate; he looked to the right and to the left--nothing better
offered; he spoke a few words of encouragement to Bess, gently patted
her neck, then struck his spurs into her sides, and cleared the spikes
by an inch. Out rushed the amazed turnpike man, thus unmercifully
bilked, and was nearly trampled to death under the feet of Paterson's
horse.

"Open the gate, fellow, and be expeditious," shouted the chief
constable.

"Not I," said the man, sturdily, "unless I gets my dues. I've been done
once already. But strike me stupid if I'm done a second time."

"Don't you perceive that's a highwayman? Don't you know that I'm chief
constable of Westminster?" said Paterson, showing his staff. "How dare
you oppose me in the discharge of my duty?"

"That may be, or it may not be," said the man, doggedly. "But you don't
pass, unless I gets the blunt, and that's the long and short on it."

Amidst a storm of oaths, Coates flung down a crown piece, and the gate
was thrown open.

Turpin took advantage of this delay to breathe his mare; and, striking
into a by-lane at Duckett's Green, cantered easily along in the
direction of Tottenham. Little repose was allowed him. Yelling like a
pack of hounds in full cry, his pursuers were again at his heels. He had
now to run the gauntlet of the long straggling town of Tottenham, and
various were the devices of the populace to entrap him. The whole place
was up in arms, shouting, screaming, running, dancing, and hurling every
possible description of missile at the horse and her rider. Dick merrily
responded to their clamor as he flew past, and laughed at the brickbats
that were showered thick as hail, and quite as harmlessly, around him.

A few more miles' hard riding tired the volunteers, and before the chase
reached Edmonton most of them were "_nowhere_." Here fresh relays were
gathered, and a strong field was again mustered. John Gilpin himself
could not have excited more astonishment amongst the good folks of
Edmonton, than did our highwayman as he galloped through their town.
Unlike the men of Tottenham, the mob received him with acclamations,
thinking, no doubt, that, like "the citizens of famous London town," he
rode for a wager. Presently, however, borne on the wings of the blast,
came the cries of "Turpin! Dick Turpin!" and the hurrahs were changed to
hootings; but such was the rate at which our highwayman rode, that no
serious opposition could be offered to him.

A man in a donkey-cart, unable to get out of the way, drew himself up in
the middle of the road. Turpin treated him as he had done the _dub_ at
the _knapping jigger_, and cleared the driver and his little wain with
ease. This was a capital stroke, and well adapted to please the
multitude, who are ever taken with a brilliant action. "Hark away,
Dick!" resounded on all hands, while hisses were as liberally bestowed
upon his pursuers.


[109] Since the earlier editions of this Romance were published, we
regret to state--for to _us_, at least, it is matter of regret, though
probably not to the travellers along the Edgeware Road--that this gentle
ascent has been cut through, and the fair prospect from its brow utterly
destroyed.