_THE YORK STAGE_

    YORK, FOUR DAYS!--_Stage Coach begins on Friday, the 18th of April,
    1706._ All that are desirous to pass from London to York, or from
    York to London, or any other place on that road, let them repair to
    the Black Swan, in Holborn, in London, or to the Black Swan, in
    Coney Street, in York. At both which places they may be received in
    a _Stage Coach_, every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, which performs
    the journey in four days--if God permits!--and sets forth at five in
    the morning. And returns from York to Stamford in two days, and from
    Stamford, by Huntingdon, in two days more. And the like stages in
    their return. Allowing each passenger fourteen pounds' weight, and
    all above, three pence per pound. Performed by Benjamin Kingman,
    Henry Harrison, and Waller Baynes.--_Placard, preserved in the
    coffee-room, of the Black Swan Inn at York._


The night had hitherto been balmy and beautiful, with a bright array of
stars, and a golden harvest moon, which seemed to diffuse even warmth
with its radiance; but now Turpin was approaching the region of fog and
fen, and he began to feel the influence of that dank atmosphere. The
intersecting dykes, yawners, gullies, or whatever they are called, began
to send forth their steaming vapors, and chilled the soft and wholesome
air, obscuring the void, and in some instances, as it were, choking up
the road itself with vapor. But fog or fen was the same to Bess; her
hoofs rattled merrily along the road, and she burst from a cloud, like
Eöus at the break of dawn.

It chanced, as he issued from a fog of this kind, that Turpin burst upon
the York stage coach. It was no uncommon thing for the coach to be
stopped; and so furious was the career of our highwayman, that the man
involuntarily drew up his horses. Turpin had also to draw in the rein, a
task of no little difficulty, as charging a huge, lumbering coach, with
its full complement of passengers, was more than even Bess could
accomplish. The moon shone brightly on Turpin and his mare. He was
unmasked, and his features were distinctly visible. An exclamation was
uttered by a gentleman on the box, who, it appeared, instantly
recognized him.

"Pull up--draw your horses across the road!" cried the gentleman;
"that's Dick Turpin, the highwayman. His capture would be worth three
hundred pounds to you," added he, addressing the coachman, "and is of
equal importance to me. Stand!" shouted he, presenting a cocked pistol.

This resolution of the gentleman was not apparently agreeable, either to
the coachman or the majority of the passengers--the name of Turpin
acting like magic upon them. One man jumped off behind, and was with
difficulty afterwards recovered, having tumbled into a deep ditch at the
roadside. An old gentleman with a cotton nightcap, who had popped out
his head to swear at the coachman, drew it suddenly back. A faint scream
in a female key issued from within, and there was a considerable hubbub
on the roof. Amongst other ominous sounds, the guard was heard to click
his long horse-pistols. "Stop the York four-day stage!" said he, forcing
his smoky voice through a world of throat-embracing shawl; "the fastest
coach in the kingdom: vos ever such atrocity heard of? I say, Joe, keep
them ere leaders steady; we shall all be in the ditch. Don't you see
where the hind wheels are? Who--whoop, I say."

The gentleman on the box now discharged his pistol, and the confusion
within was redoubled. The white nightcap was popped out like a rabbit's
head, and as quickly popped back on hearing the highwayman's voice.
Owing to the plunging of the horses, the gentleman had missed his aim.

Prepared for such emergencies as the present, and seldom at any time
taken aback, Dick received the fire without flinching. He then lashed
the horses out of his course, and rode up, pistol in hand, to the
gentleman who had fired.

"Major Mowbray," said he, in a stern tone, "I know you. I meant not
either to assault you or these gentlemen. Yet you have attempted my
life, sir, a second time. But you are now in my power, and by hell! if
you do not answer the questions I put to you, nothing earthly shall save
you."

"If you ask aught I may not answer, fire!" said the major; "I will never
ask life from such as you."

"Have you seen aught of Sir Luke Rookwood?" asked Dick.

"The villain you mean is not yet secured," replied the major, "but we
have traces of him. 'Tis with a view of procuring more efficient
assistance that I ride to town."

"They have not met then, since?" said Dick, carelessly.

"Met! whom do you mean?"

"Your sister and Sir Luke," said Dick.

"My sister meet him!" cried the major, angrily--"think you he dares show
himself at Rookwood?"

"Ho! ho!" laughed Dick--"she _is_ at Rookwood, then? A thousand thanks,
major. Good night to you, gentlemen."

"Take that with you, and remember the guard," cried the fellow, who,
unable to take aim from where he sat, had crept along the coach roof,
and discharged thence one of his large horse-pistols at what he took to
be the highwayman's head, but which, luckily for Dick, was his hat,
which he had raised to salute the passengers.

"Remember you," said Dick, coolly replacing his perforated beaver on his
brow; "you may rely upon it, my fine fellow, I'll not forget you the
next time we meet."

And off he went like the breath of the whirlwind.