_THE BRIDAL_

    _Cari._        I will not die; I must not. I am contracted
                   To a young gentleman.

    _Executioner._ Here's your wedding-ring.

                                                   _Duchess of Malfy._


Slowly did the train descend; solemnly and in silence, as if the rites
at which they were about to assist had been those of funereal, and not
of nuptial, solemnization. Indeed, to look upon those wild and fierce
faces by the ruddily-flashing torchlight, which lent to each a stern and
savage expression; to see those scowling visages surrounding a bride
from whose pallid cheeks every vestige of color, and almost of
animation, had fled; and a bridegroom, with a countenance yet more
haggard, and demeanor yet more distracted--the beholder must have
imagined that the spectacle was some horrible ceremonial, practised by
demons rather than human beings. The arched vault, the pillars, the
torchlight, the deep shadows, and the wild figures, formed a picture
worthy of Rembrandt or Salvator.

"Is Sybil within the chapel?" asked Barbara.

"I am here," returned a voice from the altar.

"Why do we tarry?" said the gipsy queen. "We are all assembled. To the
altar."

"To the altar!" shrieked Eleanor. "Oh! no--no----"

"Remember my threat, and obey," muttered Barbara. "You are in my power
now."

A convulsive sob was all the answer Eleanor could make.

"Our number is not complete," said the priest, who had looked in vain
for the sexton. "Peter Bradley is not with us."

"Ha!" exclaimed Barbara. "Let him be sought for instantly."

"Their search need not extend beyond this spot," said Peter, stepping
forward.

The knight of Malta advanced towards the altar. The torchlight reddened
upon the huge stone pillars. It fell upon the shrine, and upon the
ghastly countenance of Sybil, who stood beside it. Suddenly, as the
light approached her, an object, hitherto hidden from view, was
revealed. Sybil uttered a prolonged and fearful shriek; the knight
recoiled likewise in horror; and a simultaneous cry of astonishment
burst from the lips of the foremost of the group. All crowded forwards,
and universal consternation prevailed amongst the assemblage. Each one
gazed at his neighbor, anxious to learn the occasion of this tumult, and
vague fears were communicated to those behind, from the terrified
glances, which were the only answers returned by their comrades in
front.

"Who has dared to bring that body here?" demanded Barbara, in a tone in
which anger struggled with apprehension, pointing at the same time to
the ghastly corpse of a female, with streaming hair, at the altar's
feet. "Who has dared to do this, I say? Quick! remove it. What do you
stare at? Cravens! is this the first time you have looked upon a corpse,
that you should shrink aghast--that you tremble before it? It is a
clod--ay, less than a clod. Away with it! away, I say."

"Touch it not," cried Luke, lifting a cloud of black hair from off the
features; "it is my mother's body."

"My daughter!" exclaimed the sexton.

"What!" vociferated Barbara, "is that your daughter--is that the first
Lady Rookwood? Are the dead arisen to do honor to these nuptials? Speak!
you can, perchance, explain how she came hither."

"I know not," returned Peter, glancing fiercely at Barbara; "I may,
anon, demand that question of you. How came this body here?"

"Ask of Richard Checkley," said Barbara, turning to the priest. "He can,
perchance, inform you. Priest," added she, in a low voice, "this is your
handiwork."

"Checkley!" screamed Peter. "Is that Richard Checkley? is that----"

"Peace!" thundered Barbara; "will none remove the body? Once more I ask
you, do you fear the dead?"

A murmur arose. Balthazar alone ventured to approach the corpse.

Luke started to his feet as he advanced, his eyes glaring with tiger
fury.

"Back, old man," cried he, "and dare not, any of you, to lay a
sacrilegious finger on her corse, or I will stretch him that advances as
lowly as lies my mother's head. When or how it came hither matters not.
Here, at the altar, has it been placed, and none shall move it hence.
The dead shall witness my nuptials. Fate has ordained it--_my_ fate!
o'er which the dead preside. Her ring shall link me to my bride. I knew
not, when I snatched it from her death-cold finger, to what end I
preserved it. I learn it now. It is here." And he held forth a ring.

"'Tis a fatal boon, that twice-used ring," cried Sybil; "such a ring my
mother, on her death-bed, said should be mine. Such a ring she said
should wed me----"

"Unto whom?" fiercely demanded Luke.

"UNTO DEATH!" she solemnly rejoined.

Luke's countenance fell. He turned aside, deeply abashed, unable further
to brook her gaze; while in accents of such wildly touching pathos as
sank into the hearts of each who heard her--hearts, few of them framed
of penetrable stuff--the despairing maiden burst into the following
strain:

    THE TWICE-USED RING

    "Beware thy bridal day!"
      On her death-bed sighed my mother;
    "Beware, beware, I say,
      Death shall wed thee, and no other.
          Cold the hand shall grasp thee,
          Cold the arms shall clasp thee,
      Colder lips thy kiss shall smother!
              Beware thy bridal kiss!

    "Thy wedding ring shall be
      From a clay-cold finger taken;
    From one that, like to thee,
      Was by her love forsaken.
          For a twice-used ring
          Is a fatal thing;
      Her griefs who wore it are partaken--,
              Beware that fatal ring!

    "The altar and the grave
      Many steps are not asunder;
    Bright banners o'er thee wave,
      Shrouded horror lieth under.
          Blithe may sound the bell,
          Yet 'twill toll thy knell;
      Scathed thy chaplet by the thunder--
              Beware that blighted wreath!"

    Beware my bridal day!
      Dying lips my doom have spoken;
    Deep tones call me away;
      From the grave is sent a token.
          Cold, cold fingers bring
          That ill-omen'd ring;
      Soon will a _second_ heart be broken;
              _This_ is my bridal day.

There was a deep, profound silence as the last melancholy cadence died
away, and many a rugged heart was melted, even to tears. Eleanor,
meanwhile, remained in a state of passive stupefaction, vacantly gazing
at Sybil, upon whom alone her eyes were fixed, and appearing
indistinctly to apprehend the meaning of her song.

"This is my bridal day," murmured she, in a low tone, when Sybil had
finished. "Said not that sweet voice so? I know 'tis my bridal day. What
a church you have chosen, mother! A tomb--a sepulchre--but 'tis meet for
such nuptials as mine--and what wedding guests! Was that pale woman in
her shroud-like dress invited here by you? Tell me that, mother."

"My God, her senses are gone!" cried Mrs. Mowbray. "Why did I venture
into this horrible place?"

"Ask not _why_ now, madam," rejoined the priest. "The hour for
consideration is past. We must act. Let the marriage proceed, at all
hazards; we will then take means to extricate ourselves from this
accursed place."

"Remove that horrible object," said Mrs. Mowbray; "it fascinates the
vision of my child."

"Lend me your hand, Richard Checkley," said Peter, sternly regarding the
priest.

"No, no," replied the priest, shuddering; "I will not, cannot touch it.
Do you alone remove it."

Peter approached Luke. The latter now offered no further opposition, and
the body was taken away. The eyes of Eleanor followed it into the dark
recesses of the vault; and when she could no longer distinguish the
white flutter of the cereclothes, her laboring bosom seemed torn asunder
with the profound sigh that burst from it, and her head declined upon
her shoulder.

"Let me see that ring," said the priest, addressing Luke, who still held
the wedding-ring between his fingers.

"I am not naturally superstitious," said Mrs. Mowbray; "whether my mind
be affected with the horrors of this place, I know not; but I have a
dread of that ring. She shall not use it."

"Where no other can be found," said the priest, with a significant and
peculiar look at Mrs. Mowbray, "I see no reason why this should be
rejected. I should not have suspected you, madam, of such weakness.
Grant there were evil spell, or charm, attached to it, which, trust me,
there is _not_--as how should there be, to a harmless piece of gold?--my
benediction, and aspersion with holy lymph, will have sufficient power
to exorcise and expel it. To remove your fears it shall be done at
once."

A cup containing water was brought, together with a plate of salt--which
condiment the devil is said to abhor, and which is held to be a symbol
of immortality and of eternity; in that, being itself incorruptible, it
preserves all else from corruption,--and, with the customary Romish
formula of prayer and exorcism, the priest thrice mingled the crystal
particles with the pure fluid; after which, taking the ring in his hand
with much solemnity, he sprinkled it with a few drops of the water which
he had blessed; made the sign of the cross upon the golden circlet;
uttered another and more potent exorcism to eradicate and expel every
device of Satan, and delivered it back to Luke.

"She may wear it now in safety," said the sexton, with strong contempt.
"Were the snake himself coiled round that consecrated bauble, the
prayers of the devout Father Checkley would unclasp his lithest folds.
But wherefore do we tarry now? Naught lies between us and the altar. The
path is clear. The bridegroom grows impatient."

"And the bride?" asked Barbara.

"Is ready," replied the priest. "Madam, delay not longer. Daughter, your
hand."

Eleanor gave her hand. It was clammy and cold. Supported by her mother,
she moved slowly towards the altar, which was but a few steps from where
they stood. She offered no resistance, but did not raise her head. Luke
was by her side. Then for the first time did the enormity of the cruel,
dishonorable act he was about to commit, strike him with its full
force. He saw it in its darkest colors. It was one of those terrible
moments when the headlong wheel of passion stands suddenly still.

"There is yet time," groaned he. "Oh! let me not damn myself
perpetually! Let me save her; save Sybil; save myself."

They were at the altar--that wild wedding train. High over head the
torch was raised. The red light flashed on bridegroom and on bride,
giving to the pale features of each an almost livid look; it fell upon
the gaunt aspect of the sexton, and lit up the smile of triumphant
malice that played upon his face; it fell upon the fantastical
habiliments of Barbara, and upon the haughty but perturbed physiognomy
of Mrs. Mowbray; it fell upon the salient points of the Gothic arches;
upon one molded pillar; upon the marble image of the virgin Thecla; and
on the scarcely less marble countenance of Sybil who stood behind the
altar, silent, statue-like, immovable. The effect of light and shade on
other parts of the scene, upon the wild drapery, and harsh lineaments of
many of the group, was also eminently striking.

Just as the priest was about to commence the marriage service, a yelling
chorus, which the gipsies were accustomed to sing at the celebration of
the nuptials of one of their own tribe, burst forth. Nothing could be
more horribly discordant than their song.

    WEDDING CHORUS OF GIPSIES

              Scrape the catgut! pass the liquor!
              Let your quick feet move the quicker.
                                              Ta-ra-la!

              Dance and sing in jolly chorus,
              Bride and bridegroom are before us,
              And the patrico stands o'er us.
                                              Ta-ra-la!

              To unite their hands he's ready;
              For a moment, pals, be steady;
                  Cease your quaffing,
                  Dancing, laughing;
                  Leave off riot,
                  And be quiet,
                  While 'tis doing.
                    'Tis begun,
                  All is over!
                    Two are ONE!
              The patrico has link'd 'em;
              Daddy Hymen's torch has blink'd 'em.
                    Amen!
                    To 't again!
                    Now for quaffing,
                    Now for laughing,
                    Stocking-throwing,
                    Liquor flowing;
    For our bridals are no bridles, and our altars never alter;
    From the flagon never flinch we, in the jig we never falter.
              No! that's not _our_ way, for _we_
              Are staunch lads of Romany.
                For our wedding, then, hurrah!
                Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!

This uncouth chorus ended, the marriage proceeded. Sybil had
disappeared. Had she fled? No! she was by the bride. Eleanor
mechanically took her place. A faint voice syllabled the responses. You
could scarcely have seen Miss Mowbray's lips move. But the answers were
given, and the priest was satisfied.

He took the ring, and sprinkled it once again with the holy water, in
the form of the cross. He pronounced the prayer: "_Benedic, Domine,
annulum hunc, quem nos in tuo nomine benedicimus, ut quæ eum gestaverit,
fidelitatem integram suo sponso tenens, in pace et voluntate tua
permaneat atque in mutua charitate semper vivat._"

He was about to return the ring to Luke, when the torch, held by the
knight of Malta, was dashed to the ground by some unseen hand, and
instantly extinguished. The wild pageant vanished as suddenly as the
figures cast by a magic-lantern upon a wall disappear when the glass is
removed. A wild hubbub succeeded. Hoarsely above the clamor arose the
voice of Barbara.

"To the door, quickly!--to the door! Let no one pass, I will find out
the author of this mishap anon. Away!"

She was obeyed. Several of the crew stationed themselves at the door.

"Proceed now with the ceremony," continued Barbara. "By darkness, or by
light, the match shall be completed."

The ring was then placed upon the finger of the bride; and as Luke
touched it, he shuddered. It was cold as that of the corpse which he had
clasped but now. The prayer was said, the blessing given, the marriage
was complete.

Suddenly there issued from the darkness deep dirge-like tones, and a
voice solemnly chanted a strain, which all knew to be the death-song of
their race, hymned by wailing women over an expiring sister. The music
seemed to float in the air.

    THE SOUL-BELL

    Fast the sand of life is falling,
    Fast her latest sigh exhaling,
                      Fast, fast, is she dying.

    With death's chills her limbs are shivering,
    With death's gasp the lips are quivering,
                      Fast her soul away is flying.

    O'er the mountain-top it fleeteth,
    And the skyey wonders greeteth,
    Singing loud as stars it meeteth
                      On its way.

    Hark! the sullen Soul-bell tolling,
    Hollowly in echoes rolling,
                      Seems to say--

    "She will ope her eyes--oh, never!
    Quenched their dark light--gone for ever!
                      She is dead."

The marriage group yet lingered near the altar, awaiting, it would seem,
permission from the gipsy queen to quit the cell. Luke stirred not.
Clasped in his own, the cold hand of his bride detained him; and when he
would have moved, her tightened grasp prevented his departure.

Mrs. Mowbray's patience was exhausted by the delay. She was not
altogether free from apprehension. "Why do we linger here?" she
whispered to the priest. "Do you, father, lead the way."

"The crowd is dense," replied Checkley. "They resist my effort."

"Are we prisoners here?" asked Mrs. Mowbray, in alarm.

"Let me make the attempt," cried Luke, with fiery impatience. "I will
force a passage out."

"Quit not your bride," whispered Peter, "as you value her safety. Heed
not aught else. She alone is in danger. Suffer her not to be withdrawn
from your hand, if you would not lose her. Remain here. I will bring the
matter to a speedy issue."

"Enough," replied Luke; "I stir not hence." And he drew his bride closer
towards him. He stooped to imprint a kiss upon her lips. A cold shudder
ran through her frame as he touched them, but she resisted not his
embrace.

Peter's attempt to effect an egress was as unsuccessful as that of the
priest. Presenting Excalibur at his bosom, the knight of Malta
challenged him to stand.

"You cannot pass," exclaimed the knight; "our orders are peremptory."

"What am I to understand by this?" said Peter, angrily. "Why are we
detained?"

"You will learn all anon," returned Barbara. "In the meantime you are my
prisoners--or, if you like not the phrase, my wedding guests."

"The wedding is complete," returned the sexton; "the bride and
bridegroom are impatient to depart, and we, the guests--albeit some of
us may be no foes to darkness--desire not to hold our nuptial revels
here."

"Sybil's wedding has not taken place," said Barbara; "you must tarry for
that."

"Ha! now it comes," thought Peter. "And who, may I ask," said he, aloud,
"amongst this goodly company, is to be her bridegroom?"

"The best amongst them," returned Barbara--"Sir Luke Rookwood."

"He has a bride already," replied Peter.

"She may be _removed_," said Barbara, with bitter and peculiar emphasis.
"Dost understand my meaning now?"

"I will not understand it," said Peter. "You cannot mean to destroy her
who now stands at the altar?"

"She who now stands at the altar must make way for a successor. She who
grasps the bridegroom's hand shall die. I swear it by the oath of my
tribe."

"And think you, you will be allowed to execute your murderous intention
with impunity?" shrieked Mrs. Mowbray, in an agony of terror. "Think you
that I will stand by and see my child slaughtered before my face; that
my friends will suffer it? Think you that even your own tribe will dare
to execute your horrible purpose? They will not. They will side with us.
Even now they murmur. What can you hope to gain by an act so wild and
dreadful? What object can you have?"

"The same as your own," reiterated Barbara--"the advancement of my
child. Sybil is as dear to me as Eleanor is to you. She is my child's
child, the daughter of my best beloved daughter. I have sworn to marry
her to Sir Luke Rookwood. The means are in my power. I will keep my vow;
I will wed her to him. You did not hesitate to tear your daughter from
the man she loved, to give her to the man she hated; and for what? For
gold--for power--for rank. I have the same motive. I love my child, and
she loves Sir Luke--has loved him long and truly; therefore shall she
have him. What to me is _your_ child, or _your_ feelings, except they
are subservient to my wishes? She stands in my way. I remove her."

"Who placed her in your path?" asked the sexton. "Did you not lend a
helping hand to create that obstacle yourself?"

"I did," replied Barbara. "Would you know wherefore? I will tell you. I
had a double motive for it. There is a curse upon the house of Rookwood,
that kills the first fair bride each generation leads to the altar. Have
you never heard of it?"

"I have! And did that idle legend sway you?"

"And do you call it idle? _You!_ Well--I had another motive--a
prophecy."

"By yourself uttered," replied Peter.

"Even so," replied Barbara. "The prophecy is fulfilled. The stray rook
is found. The rook hath with rook mated. Luke hath wedded Eleanor. He
will hold possession of his lands. The prophecy is fulfilled."

"But _how_?" asked Peter; "will your art tell you how and why he shall
now hold possession? Can you tell me that?"

"My art goes not so far. I have predicted the event. It has come to
pass. I am satisfied. He has wedded her. Be it mine to free him from
that yoke." And Barbara laughed exultingly.

The sexton approached the old crone, and laid his hand with violence
upon her shoulder.

"Hear _me_," cried he, "and I will tell you that which your juggling art
refuses to reveal. Eleanor Mowbray is heir to the lands of Rookwood! The
estates are _hers_! They were bequeathed to her by her grandsire, Sir
Reginald."

"She was unborn when he died," cried Mrs. Mowbray.

"True," replied Peter; "but the lands were left to your issue _female_,
should such issue be born."

"And did Sir Piers, my brother, know of this? did he see this will,"
asked Mrs. Mowbray, with trembling impatience.

"He did; and withheld the knowledge of it from you and yours."

"Ah! why knew I not this before? Why did you not tell me ere that was
done which cannot be undone? I have sacrificed my child."

"Because it did not chime with my purposes to tell you," replied Peter,
coldly.

"It is false--it is false," cried Mrs. Mowbray, her anger and vexation
getting the better of her fears. "I will not believe it. Who are you,
that pretend to know the secrets of our house?"

"One of that house," replied the sexton.

"Your name?"

"Would you know my name?" answered Peter, sternly. "The time is come
when I will no longer conceal it. I am Alan Rookwood."

"My father's brother!" exclaimed Mrs. Mowbray.

"Ay, Alan Rookwood. The sworn enemy of your father--of you--of all of
ye: your fate--your destiny--your curse. I am that Alan Rookwood whose
name you breathed in the vault. I am he, the avenger--the avenged. I saw
your father die. I heard his groans--_his groans!_--ha, ha! I saw his
sons die: one fell in battle--I was with him there. The other expired in
his bed. I was with Sir Piers when he breathed his last, and listened to
his death agonies. 'Twas I who counselled him to keep the lands from you
and from your child, and he withheld them. One only amongst the race,
whose name I have cast off, have I loved; and him--because," added he,
with something like emotion--"because he was my daughter's child--Luke
Rookwood. And even he shall minister to my vengeance. He will be your
curse--your daughter's curse--for he loves her not. Yet he is her
husband, and hath her land;--ha, ha!" And he laughed till he became
convulsed with the paroxysm of fiendish exultation.

"Mine ears are stunned," cried Mrs. Mowbray.

"The bride is mine; relinquish her to me," said Barbara. "Advance and
seize her, my children."

Alan Rookwood--for so we shall henceforth denominate the
sexton--suddenly grew calm: he raised the whistle to his lips, and blew
a call so loud and shrill, that those who were advancing hung back
irresolute.

There was a rush at the door of the vault. The sentinels were struck
down; and with pistols in each hand, and followed by two assistants,
Dick Turpin sprang into the thick of the crew.

"Here we are," cried he, "ready for action. Where is Sir Luke Rookwood?
where my churchyard pal, Peter?"

"Here," cried the sexton and Luke simultaneously.

"Then stand aside," cried Dick, pushing in the direction of the sounds,
and bearing down all opposition. "Have a care there--these triggers are
ticklish. Friend or foe, he who touches me shall have a bullet in his
gizzard. Here I am, pal Peter; and here are my two chums, Rust and
Wilder. Cut the whid."

"Have we license to pass scathless now?" asked the sexton; "or shall we
make good our way?"

"You shall not pass," cried Barbara, furiously. "Think you to rob me of
my prey? What, cowards! do you hesitate? Ha!"

"Kindle the torches," cried several voices. "We fight not in the dark."

A pistol was flashed. The torch again blazed. Its light fell upon a
tumultuous group.

"Seize the bride," cried Barbara.

"Hold!" exclaimed a voice from the altar. The voice was that of Sybil.

Her hand was clasped in that of Luke. Eleanor had fainted in the arms of
the gipsy girl Handassah.

"Are you my bride?" ejaculated Luke, in dismay.

"Behold the ring upon my finger! Your own hand placed it there."

"Betrayed!" screamed Alan, in a voice of anguish. "My schemes
annihilated--myself undone--my enemies triumphant--lost! lost! All is
destroyed--all!"

"Joy! joy!" exclaimed Mrs. Mowbray: "my child is saved."

"And _mine_ destroyed," groaned Barbara. "I have sworn by the cross to
slay the bride--and Sybil is that bride."