_THE CHAMBER OF DEATH_

    It is the body--I have orders given
    That here it should be laid.

                                                        _De Montfort._


The recess upon which the panel opened had been a small oratory, and,
though entirely disused, still retained its cushions and its crucifix.
There were two other entrances to this place of prayer, the one
communicating with a further bedchamber, the other leading to the
gallery. Through the latter, after closing the aperture, without
relinquishing his grasp, Luke passed.

It was growing rapidly dark, and at the brightest seasons this gloomy
corridor was but imperfectly lighted from narrow, painted, and
wire-protected windows that looked into the old quadrangular courtyard
below; and as they issued from the oratory a dazzling flash of
lightning--a storm having suddenly arisen--momentarily illumined the
whole length of the passage, disclosing the retreating figure of a man,
wrapped in a large sable cloak, at the other extremity of the gallery.
Lady Rookwood uttered an outcry for assistance; but the man, whoever he
might be, disappeared in the instantaneously succeeding gloom, leaving
her in doubt whether or not her situation had been perceived. Luke had
seen this dark figure at the same instant; and, not without
apprehensions lest his plans should be defeated, he griped Lady
Rookwood's arm still more strictly, and placing the muzzle of the pistol
to her breast, hurried her rapidly forwards.

All was now in total obscurity; the countenance of neither could be
perceived as they trod the dark passage; but Luke's unrelaxed grasp
indicated no change in his purposes, nor did the slow, dignified march
of the lady betray any apprehension on her part. Descending a spiral
staircase, which led from the gallery to a lower story, their way now
lay beneath the entrance-hall, a means of communication little used.
Their tread sounded hollowly on the flagged floor; no other sound was
heard. Mounting a staircase, similar to the one they had just descended,
they arrived at another passage. A few paces brought them to the door.
Luke turned the handle, and they stood within the chamber of the dead.

The room which contained the remains of poor Sir Piers was arrayed in
all that mockery of state which, vainly attempting to deride death, is
itself a bitter derision of the living. It was the one devoted to the
principal meals of the day; a strange choice, but convenience had
dictated its adoption by those with whom this part of the ceremonial had
originated, and long custom had rendered its usage, for this purpose,
almost prescriptive. This room, which was of some size, had originally
formed part of the great hall, from which it was divided by a thick
screen of black, lustrously varnished oak, enriched with fanciful
figures carved in bold relief. The walls were panelled with the same
embrowned material, and sustained sundry portraits of the members of the
family, in every possible costume, from the steely gear of Sir Ranulph,
down to the flowing attire of Sir Reginald. Most of the race were ranged
around the room; and, seen in the yellow light shed upon their features
by the flambeaux, they looked like an array of stern and silent
witnesses, gazing upon their departed descendant. The sides of the
chamber were hung with black cloth, and upon a bier in the middle of the
room rested the body. Broad escutcheons, decked out in glowing colors
pompously set forth the heraldic honors of the departed. Tall lights
burned at the head and feet, and fragrant perfumes diffused their odors
from silver censers.

The entrance of Luke and his unwilling companion had been abrupt. The
transition from darkness to the glare of light was almost blinding, and
they had advanced far into the room ere Lady Rookwood perceived a man,
whom she took to be one of the mutes, leaning over the bier. The
coffin-lid was entirely removed, and the person, whose back was towards
them appeared to be wrapped in mournful contemplation of the sad
spectacle before him. Suddenly bursting from Luke's hold, Lady Rookwood
rushed forward with a scream, and touched the man's shoulder. He started
at the summons, and disclosed the features of her son!

Rapidly as her own act, Luke followed. He levelled a pistol at her head,
but his hand dropped to his side as he encountered the glance of
Ranulph. All three seemed paralyzed by surprise. Ranulph, in
astonishment, extended his arm to his mother, who, placing one arm over
his shoulder, pointed with the other to Luke; the latter stared sternly
and inquiringly at both--yet none spoke.