_THE HUT ON THORNE WASTE_

    _Hind._  Are all our horses and our arms in safety?

    _Furbo._ They feed, like Pluto's palfreys, under ground.
             Our pistols, swords, and other furniture,
             Are safely locked up at our rendezvous.

                                            _Prince of Prigs' Revels._


The hut on Thorne Waste, to which we have before incidentally alluded,
and whither we are now about to repair, was a low, lone hovel, situate
on the banks of the deep and oozy Don, at the eastern extremity of that
extensive moor. Ostensibly its owner fulfilled the duties of ferryman to
that part of the river; but as the road which skirted his tenement was
little frequented, his craft was, for the most part, allowed to sleep
undisturbed in her moorings.

In reality, however, he was the inland agent of a horde of smugglers who
infested the neighboring coast; his cabin was their rendezvous; and not
unfrequently, it was said, the depository of their contraband goods.
Conkey Jem--so was he called by his associates, on account of the
Slawkenbergian promontory which decorated his countenance--had been an
old hand at the same trade; but having returned from a seven years'
leave of absence from his own country, procured by his lawless life, now
managed matters with more circumspection and prudence, and had never
since been detected in his former illicit traffic; nor, though so
marvellously gifted in that particular himself, was he ever known to
_nose_ upon any of his accomplices; or, in other words, to betray them.
On the contrary, his hut was a sort of asylum for all fugitives from
justice; and although the sanctity of his walls would, in all
probability, have been little regarded, had any one been, detected
within them, yet, strange to say, even if a robber had been tracked--as
it often chanced--to Jem's immediate neighborhood, all traces of him
were sure to be lost at the ferryman's hut; and further search was
useless.

Within, the hut presented such an appearance as might be expected, from
its owner's pursuits and its own unpromising exterior. Consisting of
little more than a couple of rooms, the rude whitewashed walls
exhibited, in lieu of prints of more pretension, a gallery of
choicely-illustrated ballads, celebrating the exploits of various
highwaymen, renowned in song, amongst which our friend Dick Turpin
figured conspicuously upon his sable steed, Bess being represented by a
huge rampant black patch, and Dick, with a pistol considerably longer
than the arm that sustained it. Next to this curious collection was a
drum-net, a fishing-rod, a landing-net, an eel-spear, and other
piscatorial apparatus, with a couple of sculls and a boat-hook,
indicative of Jem's ferryman's office, suspended by various hooks; the
whole blackened and begrimed by peat-smoke, there being no legitimate
means of _exit_ permitted to the vapor generated by the turf-covered
hearthstone. The only window, indeed, in the hut, was to the front; the
back apartment, which served Jem for dormitory, had no aperture whatever
for the admission of light, except such as was afforded through the door
of communication between the rooms. A few broken rush-bottomed chairs,
with a couple of dirty tables, formed the sum total of the ferryman's
furniture.

Notwithstanding the grotesque effect of his exaggerated nasal organ,
Jem's aspect was at once savage and repulsive; his lank black hair hung
about his inflamed visage in wild elf locks, the animal predominating
throughout; his eyes were small, red, and wolfish, and glared
suspiciously from beneath his scarred and tufted eyebrows; while certain
of his teeth projected, like the tusks of a boar, from out his
coarse-lipped, sensual mouth. Dwarfish in stature, and deformed in
person, Jem was built for strength; and what with his width of shoulder
and shortness of neck, his figure looked as square and as solid as a
cube. His throat and hirsute chest, constantly exposed to the weather,
had acquired a glowing tan, while his arms, uncovered to the shoulders,
and clothed with fur, like a bear's hide, down, almost, to the tips of
his fingers, presented a knot of folded muscles, the concentrated force
of which few would have desired to encounter in action.

It was now on the stroke of midnight; and Jem, who had been lying
extended upon the floor of his hovel, suddenly aroused by that warning
impulse which never fails to awaken one of his calling at the exact
moment when they require to be upon the alert, now set about fanning
into flame the expiring fuel upon his hearth. Having succeeded in
igniting further portions of the turf, Jem proceeded to examine the
security of his door and window, and satisfied that lock and bolt were
shot, and that the shutter was carefully closed, he kindled a light at
his fire, and walked towards his bedroom. But it was not to retire for
the night that the ferryman entered his dormitory. Beside his crazy
couch stood a litter of empty bottles and a beer cask, crowding the
chamber. The latter he rolled aside, and pressing his foot upon the
plank beneath it, the board gave way, and a trap-door opening,
discovered a ladder, conducting, apparently, into the bowels of the
earth. Jem leaned over the abyss, and called in hoarse accents to some
one below.

An answer was immediately returned, and a light became soon afterwards
visible at the foot of the ladder. Two figures next ascended; the first
who set foot within the ferryman's chamber was Alan Rookwood: the other,
as the reader may perhaps conjecture, was his grandson.

"Is it the hour?" asked Luke, as he sprang from out the trap-door.

"Ay," replied Jem, with a coarse laugh, "or I had not disturbed myself
to call you. But, maybe," added he, softening his manner a little,
"you'll like some refreshments before you start? A stoup of Nantz will
put you in cue for the job, ha, ha!"

"Not I," replied Luke, who could ill tolerate his companion's
familiarity.

"Give me to drink," said Alan, walking feebly towards the fire, and
extending his skinny fingers before it. "I am chilled by the damps of
that swampy cave--the natural heat within me is nigh extinguished."

"Here is that shall put fresh marrow into your old bones," returned Jem,
handing him a tumbler of brandy; "never stint it. I'll be sworn you'll
be the better on't, for you look desperate queer, man, about the
mazard."

Alan was, in sooth, a ghastly spectacle. The events of the last few days
had wrought a fearful change. His countenance was almost exanimate; and
when, with shaking hand and trembling lips, he had drained the fiery
potion to the dregs, a terrible grimace was excited upon his features,
such as is produced upon the corpse by the action of the galvanic
machine. Even Jem regarded him with a sort of apprehension. After he had
taken breath for a moment, Alan broke out into a fit of wild and
immoderate laughter.

"Why, ay," said he, "this is indeed to grow young again, and to feel
fresh fire within one's veins. Who would have thought so much of life
and energy could reside in this little vessel? I am myself once more,
and not the same soulless, pulseless lump of clay I was a moment or two
back. The damps of that den had destroyed me--and the solitude--the
_waking dreams_ I've had--the visions! horrible! I will not think of
them. I am better now--ready to execute my plans--_your_ plans I should
say, grandson Luke. Are our horses in readiness? Why do we tarry? The
hour is arrived, and I would not that my new-blown courage should
evaporate ere the great work for which I live be accomplished. That
done, I ask no further stimulant. Let us away."

"We tarry but for Turpin," said Luke; "I am as impatient as yourself. I
fear some mischance must have befallen him, or he would have been true
to his appointment. Do you not think so?" he added, addressing the
ferryman.

"Why," replied Jem, reluctantly, "since you put it home to me, and I
can't conceal it no longer, I'll tell you what I didn't tell afore, for
fear you should be down in the mouth about it. Dick Turpin can do
nothing for you--he's grabb'd."

"Turpin apprehended!" ejaculated Luke.

"Ay," returned Jem. "I learnt from a farmer who crossed the ferry at
nightfall, that he were grabb'd this morning at York, after having
ridden his famous cherry-colored prad to death--that's what hurts me
more not all the rest; though I fear Dick will scarce cheat the nubbing
cheat this go. His time's up, I calculate."

"Will you supply his place and accompany us?" asked Luke of the
ferryman.

"No, no," replied Jem, shaking his head; "there's too much risk, and too
little profit, in the business for me--it won't pay."

"And what might tempt you to undertake the enterprise?" asked Alan.

"More than you have to offer, Master Peter," replied Jem, who had not
been enlightened upon the subject of Alan's real name or condition.

"How know you that?" demanded Alan. "Name your demand."

"Well, then, I'll not say but a hundred pounds, if you had it, might
bribe me----"

"To part with your soul to the devil, I doubt not," said Luke, fiercely
stamping the ground. "Let us be gone. We need not his mercenary aid. We
will do without him."

"Stay," said Alan, "you shall have the hundred, provided you will assure
us of your services."

"Cut no more blarneyfied whids, Master Sexton," replied Jem, in a gruff
tone. "If I'm to go, I must have the chink down, and that's more nor
either of you can do, I'm thinking."

"Give me your purse," whispered Alan to his grandson. "Pshaw," continued
he, "do you hesitate? This man can do much for us. Think upon Eleanor,
and be prudent. You cannot accomplish your task unaided." Taking the
amount from the purse, he gave it to the ferryman, adding, "If we
succeed, the sum shall be doubled; and now let us set out."

During Alan's speech, Jem's sharp eyes had been fastened upon the purse,
while he mechanically clutched the bank-notes which were given to him.
He could not remove his gaze, but continued staring at the treasure
before him, as if he would willingly, by force, have made it all his
own.

Alan saw the error he had committed in exposing the contents of the
purse to the avaricious ferryman, and was about to restore it to Luke,
when the bag was suddenly snatched from his grasp, and himself levelled
by a blow upon the floor. Conkey Jem found the temptation irresistible.
Knowing himself to be a match for both his companions, and imagining he
was secure from interruption, he conceived the idea of making away with
them, and possessing himself of their wealth. No sooner had he disposed
of Alan, than he assailed Luke, who met his charge half way. With the
vigor and alacrity of the latter the reader is already acquainted, but
he was no match for the herculean strength of the double-jointed
ferryman, who, with the ferocity of the boar he so much resembled, thus
furiously attacked him. Nevertheless, as may be imagined, he was not
disposed to yield up his life tamely. He saw at once the villain's
murderous intentions, and, well aware of his prodigious power, would not
have risked a close struggle could he have avoided it. Snatching the
eel-spear from the wall, he had hurled it at the head of his adversary,
but without effect. In the next instant he was locked in a clasp
terrible as that of a Polar bear. In spite of all his struggles, Luke
was speedily hurled to the ground: and Jem, who had thrown himself upon
him, was apparently searching about for some weapon to put a bloody
termination to the conflict, when the trampling of a horse was heard at
the door, three taps were repeated slowly, one after the other, and a
call resounded from a whistle.

"Damnation!" ejaculated Jem, gruffly, "interrupted!" And he seemed
irresolute, slightly altering his position on Luke's body.

The moment was fortunate for Luke, and, in all probability, saved his
life. He extricated himself from the ferryman's grasp, regained his
feet, and, what was of more importance, the weapon he had thrown away.

"Villain!" cried he, about to plunge the spear with all his force into
his enemy's side, "you shall----"

The whistle was again heard without.

"Don't you hear that?" cried Jem: "'Tis Turpin's call."

"Turpin!" echoed Luke, dropping the point of his weapon. "Unbar the
door, you treacherous rascal, and admit him."

"Well, say no more about it, Sir Luke," said Jem, fawningly; "I knows I
owes you my life, and I thank you for it. Take back the lowre. He should
not have shown it me--it was that as did all the mischief."

"Unbar the door, and parley not," said Luke contemptuously.

Jem complied with pretended alacrity, but real reluctance, casting
suspicious glances at Luke as he withdrew the bolts. The door at length
being opened, haggard, exhausted, and covered with dust, Dick Turpin
staggered into the hut.

"Well, I am here," said he, with a hollow laugh. "I've kept my word--ha,
ha! I've been damnably put to it; but here I am, ha, ha!" And he sank
upon one of the stools.

"We heard you were apprehended," said Luke. "I am glad to find the
information was false," added he, glancing angrily at the ferryman.

"Whoever told you that, told you a lie, Sir Luke," replied Dick; "but
what are you scowling at, old Charon?--and you, Sir Luke? Why do you
glower at each other? Make fast the door--bolt it, Cerberus--right! Now
give me a glass of brandy, and then I'll talk--a bumper--so--another.
What's that I see--a dead man? Old Peter--Alan I mean--has anything
happened to him, that he has taken his measure there so quietly?"

"Nothing, I trust," said Luke, stooping to raise up his grandsire. "The
blow has stunned him."

"The blow?" repeated Turpin. "What! there _has_ been a quarrel then? I
thought as much from your amiable looks at each other. Come, come, we
must have no differences. Give the old earthworm a taste of this--I'll
engage it will bring him to fast enough. Ay, rub his temples with it if
you'd rather; but it's a better remedy down the gullet--the natural
course; and hark ye, Jem, search your crib quickly, and see if you have
any _grub_ within it, and any more _bub_ in the cellar: I'm as hungry as
a hunter, and as thirsty as a camel."