_THE APPARITION_

    _Gibbet._ Well, gentlemen, 'tis a fine night for our enterprise.

    _Hounslow._ Dark as hell.

    _Bagshot._ And blows like the devil.

    _Boniface._ You'll have no creature to deal with but the ladies.

    _Gibbet._ And I can assure you, friend, there's a great deal of
    address, and good manners, in robbing a lady. I am the most of a
    gentleman, that way, that ever travelled the road.

                                                    _Beaux Stratagem._


Accompanied by her son, Lady Rookwood, on quitting the chamber of the
dead, returned to her own room. She then renewed all her arguments; had
recourse to passionate supplications--to violent threats, but without
effect. Ranulph maintained profound silence. Passion, as it ever doth,
defeated its own ends; and Lady Rookwood, seeing the ill effect her
anger would probably produce, gradually softened the asperity of her
manner, and suffered him to depart.

Left to herself, and to the communings of her own troubled spirit, her
fortitude, in a measure, forsook her, under the pressure of the
difficulties by which she was environed. There was no plan she could
devise--no scheme adopt, unattended with peril. She must act alone--with
promptitude and secrecy. To win her son over was her chief desire, and
that, at all hazards, she was resolved to do. But how? She knew of only
one point on which he was vulnerable--his love for Eleanor Mowbray. By
raising doubts in his mind, and placing fresh difficulties in his path,
she might compel him to acquiesce in her machinations, as a necessary
means of accomplishing his own object. This she hoped to effect. Still
there was a depth of resolution in the placid stream of Ranulph's
character which she had often noticed with apprehension. Aware of his
firmness, she dreaded lest his sense of justice should be stronger than
his passion.

As she wove these webs of darkness, fear, hitherto unknown, took
possession of her soul. She listened to the howling of the wind--to the
vibration of the rafters--to the thunder's roar, and to the hissing
rain--till she, who never trembled at the thought of danger, became
filled with vague uneasiness. Lights were ordered; and when her old
attendant returned. Lady Rookwood fixed a look so wistful upon her, that
Agnes ventured to address her.

"Bless you, my lady," said the ancient handmaiden, trembling, "you look
very pale, and no wonder. I feel sick at heart, too. Oh! I shall be glad
when they return from the church, and happier still when the morning
dawns. I can't sleep a wink--can't close my eyes, but I think of him."

"Of _him_?"

"Of Sir Piers, my lady; for though he's dead, I don't think he's gone."

"How?"

"Why, my lady, the corruptible part of him's gone, sure enough. But the
incorruptible, as Dr. Small calls it--the sperrit, my lady. It might be
my fancy, your ladyship; but as I'm standing here, when I went back into
the room just now for the lights, as I hope to live, I thought I saw Sir
Piers in the room."

"You are crazed, Agnes."

"No, my lady, I'm not crazed; it was mere fancy, no doubt. Oh, it's a
blessed thing to live with an easy conscience--a thrice blessed thing to
_die_ with an easy one, and that's what I never shall, I'm afeard. Poor
Sir Piers! I'd mumble a prayer for him, if I durst."

"Leave me," said Lady Rookwood, impatiently.

And Agnes quitted the room.

"What if the dead can return?" thought Lady Rookwood. "All men doubt it,
yet all men believe it. _I_ would not believe it, were there not a
creeping horror that overmasters me, when I think of the state beyond
the grave--that intermediate state, for such it must be, when the body
lieth mouldering in the ground, and the soul survives, to wander,
unconfined, until the hour of doom. And doth the soul survive when
disenthralled? Is it dependent on the body? Does it perish with the
body? These are doubts I cannot resolve. But if I deemed there was no
future state, this hand should at once liberate me from my own
weaknesses--my fears--my life. There is but one path to acquire that
knowledge, which, once taken, can never be retraced. I am content to
live--while living, to be feared--it may be, hated; when dead, to be
contemned--yet still remembered. Ha! what sound was that? A stifled
scream! Agnes!--without there! She is full of fears. I am not free from
them myself, but I will shake them off. This will divert their channel,"
continued she, drawing from her bosom the marriage certificate. "This
will arouse the torpid current of my blood--'_Piers Rookwood to Susan
Bradley_.' And by whom was it solemnized? The name is Checkley--Richard
Checkley. Ha! I bethink me--a Papist priest--a recusant--who was for
some time an inmate of the hall. I have heard of this man--he was
afterwards imprisoned, but escaped--he is either dead or in a foreign
land. No witnesses--'tis well! Methinks Sir Piers Rookwood did well to
preserve this. It shall light his funeral pyre. Would he could now
behold me, as I consume it!"

She held the paper in the direction of the candle; but, ere it could
touch the flame, it dropped from her hand. As if her horrible wish had
been granted, before her stood the figure of her husband! Lady Rookwood
started not. No sign of trepidation or alarm, save the sudden stiffening
of her form, was betrayed. Her bosom ceased to palpitate--her
respiration stopped--her eyes were fixed upon the apparition.

The figure appeared to regard her sternly. It was at some little
distance, within the shade cast by the lofty bedstead. Still she could
distinctly discern it. There was no ocular deception; it was attired in
the costume Sir Piers was wont to wear--a hunting dress. All that her
son had told her rushed to her recollection. The phantom advanced. Its
countenance was pale, and wore a gloomy frown.

"What would you destroy?" demanded the apparition, in a hollow tone.

"The evidence of----"

"What?"

"Your marriage."

"With yourself, accursed woman?"

"With Susan Bradley."

"What's that I hear?" shouted the figure, in an altered tone. "Married
to her! then Luke _is_ legitimate, and heir to this estate!" Whereupon
the apparition rushed to the table, and laid a very substantial grasp
upon the document. "A marriage certificate!" ejaculated the spectre;
"here's a piece of luck! It ain't often in our lottery life we draw a
prize like this. One way or the other, it must turn up a few cool
thousands."

"Restore that paper, villain," exclaimed Lady Rookwood, recovering all
the audacity natural to her character the instant she discovered the
earthly nature of the intruder--"restore it, or, by Heaven, you shall
rue your temerity."

"Softly, softly," replied the pseudo-phantom, with one hand pushing back
the lady, while the other conveyed the precious document to the custody
of his nether man--"softly," said he, giving the buckskin pocket a
slap--"two words to that, my lady. I know its value as well as yourself,
and must make my market. The highest offer has me, your ladyship; he's
but a poor auctioneer that knocks down his ware when only one bidder is
present. Luke Bradley, or, as I find he now is, Sir Luke Rookwood, may
come down more handsomely."

"Who are you, ruffian, and to what end is this masquerade assumed? If
for the purpose of terrifying me into compliance with the schemes of
that madman, Luke Bradley, whom I presume to be your confederate, your
labor is misspent--your stolen disguise has no more weight with me than
his forged claims."

"Forged claims! Egad, he must be a clever hand to have forged that
certificate. Your ladyship, however, is in error. Sir Luke Rookwood is
no associate of mine; I am his late father's friend. But I have no time
to bandy talk. What money have you in the house? Be alive."

"You _are_ a robber, then?"

"Not I. I'm a tax-gatherer--a collector of Rich-Rates--ha, ha! What
plate have you got? Nay, don't be alarmed--take it quietly--these things
can't be helped--better make up your mind to do it without more
ado--much the best plan--no screaming, it may injure your lungs, and can
alarm nobody. Your maids have done as much before--it's beneath your
dignity to make so much noise. So, you will not heed me? As you will."
Saying which, he deliberately cut the bell-cord, and drew out a brace of
pistols at the same time.

"Agnes!" shrieked Lady Rookwood, now seriously alarmed.

"I must caution your ladyship to be silent," said the robber, who, as
our readers will no doubt have already conjectured, was no other than
the redoubted Jack Palmer. "Agnes is already disposed of," said he,
cocking a pistol. "However like your deceased 'lord and master' I may
appear, you will find you have got a very different spirit from that of
Sir Piers to deal with. I am naturally the politest man breathing--have
been accounted the best-bred man on the road by every lady whom I have
had the honor of addressing; and I should be sorry to sully my
well-earned reputation by anything like rudeness. I must use a little
force, of the gentlest kind. Perhaps you will permit me to hand you to a
chair. Bless me! what a wrist your ladyship has got. Excuse me if I hurt
you, but you are so devilish strong. What ho! 'Sir Piers Rookwood
calls--'"

"Ready," cried a voice.

"That's the word," rejoined another; "ready;" and immediately two men,
their features entirely hidden by a shroud of black crape, accoutred in
rough attire, and each armed with pistols, rushed into the room.

"Lend a hand," said Jack.

Even in this perilous extremity Lady Rookwood's courage did not desert
her. Anticipating their purpose, ere her assailants could reach her she
extricated herself from Palmer's grasp, and rushed upon the foremost so
unexpectedly, that, before the man could seize her, she snatched a
pistol from his hand, and presented it at the group with an aspect like
that of a tigress at bay--her eye wandering from one to the other, as if
selecting a mark.

There was a pause of a few seconds, in which the men glanced at the
lady, and then at their leader. Jack looked blank.

"Hem!" said he, coolly; "this is something new--disarmed--defied by a
petticoat. Hark ye, Rob Rust, the disgrace rests with you. Clear your
character, by securing her at once. What! afraid of a woman?"

"A woman!" repeated Rust, in a surly tone; "devilish like a woman,
indeed. Few men could do what she has done. Give the word, and I fire.
As to seizing her, that's more than I'll engage to do."

"You are a coward," cried Jack. "I will steer clear of blood--if I can
help it. Come, madam, surrender, like the more sensible part of your
sex, at discretion. You will find resistance of no avail." And he
stepped boldly towards her.

Lady Rookwood pulled the trigger. The pistol flashed in the pan. She
flung away the useless weapon without a word.

"Ha, ha!" said Jack, as he leisurely stooped to pick up the pistol, and
approached her ladyship; "the bullet is not yet cast that is to be my
billet. Here," said he, dealing Rust a heavy thump upon the shoulder
with the butt-end of the piece, "take back your snapper, and look you
prick the touchhole, or your barking-iron will never bite for you. And
now, madam, I must take the liberty of again handing you to a seat. Dick
Wilder, the cord--quick. It distresses me to proceed to such lengths
with your ladyship--but safe bind, safe find, as Mr. Coates would say."

"You will not bind me, ruffian."

"Your ladyship is very much mistaken--I have no alternative--your
ladyship's wrist is far too dexterous to be at liberty. I must
furthermore request of your ladyship to be less vociferous--you
interrupt business, which should be transacted with silence and
deliberation."

Lady Rookwood's rage and vexation at this indignity were beyond all
bounds. Resistance, however, was useless, and she submitted in silence.
The cord was passed tightly round her arms, when it flashed upon her
recollection for the first time that Coates and Tyrconnel, who were in
charge of her captive in the lower corridor, might be summoned to her
assistance. This idea no sooner crossed her mind than she uttered a loud
and prolonged scream.

"'Sdeath!" cried Jack; "civility is wasted here. Give me the gag, Rob."

"Better slit her squeaking-pipe at once," replied Rust, drawing his
clasped knife; "she'll thwart everything."

"The gag, I say, not _that_."

"I can't find the gag," exclaimed Wilder, savagely. "Leave Rob Rust to
manage her--he'll silence her, I warrant you, while you and I rummage
the room."

"Ay, leave her to me," said the other miscreant. "Go about your
business, and take no heed. Her hands are fast--she can't scratch. I'll
do it with a single gash--send her to join her lord, whom she loved so
well, before he's under ground. They'll have something to see when they
come home from the master's funeral--their mistress _cut and dry_ for
another. Ho, ho!"

"Mercy, mercy!" shrieked Lady Rookwood.

"Ay, ay, I'll be merciful," said Rust, brandishing his knife before her
eyes. "I'll not be long about it. Leave her to me--I'll give her a taste
of Sir Sydney."

"No, no, Rust; no bloodshed," said Jack, authoritatively; "I'll find
some other way to gag the jade."

At this moment a noise of rapid footsteps was heard within the passage.

"Assistance comes," screamed Lady Rookwood. "Help! help!"

"To the door!" cried Jack. The words were scarcely out of his mouth
before Luke dashed into the room, followed by Coates and Tyrconnel.

Palmer and his companions levelled their pistols at the intruders, and
the latter would have fired, but Jack's keen eye having discerned Luke
amongst the foremost, checked further hostilities for the present. Lady
Rookwood, meanwhile, finding herself free from restraint, rushed towards
her deliverers, and crouched beneath Luke's protecting arms, which were
extended, pistol in hand, over her head. Behind them stood Titus
Tyrconnel, flourishing the poker, and Mr. Coates, who, upon the sight of
so much warlike preparation, began somewhat to repent having rushed so
precipitately into the lion's den.

"Luke Bradley!" exclaimed Palmer, stepping forward.

"Luke Bradley!" echoed Lady Rookwood, recoiling and staring into his
face.

"Fear nothing, madam," cried Luke. "I am here to assist you--I will
defend you with my life."

"_You_ defend _me_!" exclaimed Lady Rookwood, doubtfully.

"Even _I_," cried Luke, "strange as it may sound."

"Holy powers protect me!" ejaculated Titus. "As I live, it is Sir Piers
himself."

"Sir Piers!" echoed Coates, catching the infection of terror, as he
perceived Palmer more distinctly. "What! is the dead come to life again?
A ghost, a ghost!"

"By my soul," cried Titus, "it's the first ghost I ever heard of that
committed a burglary in its own house, and on the night of the body's
burial, too. But who the devil are these? maybe they're ghosts
likewise."

"They are," said Palmer, in a hollow tone, mimicking the voice of Sir
Piers, "attendant spirits. We are come for this woman; her time is out;
so no more palavering, Titus. Lend a hand to take her to the churchyard,
and be hanged to you."

"Upon my conscience, Mr. Coates," cried Titus, "it's either the devil,
or Sir Piers. We'll be only in the way here. He's only just settling his
old scores with his lady. I thought it would come to this long ago. We'd
best beat a retreat."

Jack took advantage of the momentary confusion created by this
incidental alarm at his disguise to direct Rust towards the door by
which the new comers had entered; and, this being accomplished, he burst
into a loud laugh.

"What! not know me?" cried he--"not know your old friend with a new
face, Luke? Nor you, Titus? Nor you, who can see through a millstone,
lawyer Coates, don't you recognize----"

"Jack Palmer, as I'm a sinner!" cried Titus. "Why, this beats Banaghan.
Arrah! Jack, honey, what does this mean? Is it yourself I see in such
company? You're not robbing in earnest?"

"Indeed but I am, friend Titus," exclaimed Jack; "and _it is_ my own
self you see. I just took the liberty of borrowing Sir Piers's old
hunting-coat from the justice-room. You said my toggery wouldn't do for
the funeral. I'm no other than plain Jack Palmer, after all."

"With half a dozen aliases at your back, I dare say," cried Coates. "_I_
suspected you all along. All your praise of highwaymen was not lost upon
me. No, no; I _can_ see into a millstone, be it ever so thick."

"Well," replied Jack, "I'm sorry to see you here, friend Titus. Keep
quiet, and you shall come to no harm. As to you, Luke Bradley, you have
anticipated my intention by half an hour; I meant to set you free. For
you, Mr. Coates, you may commit all future care of your affairs to your
executors, administrators, and assigns. You will have no further need to
trouble yourself with worldly concerns," added he, levelling a pistol at
the attorney, who, however, shielded himself, in an agony of
apprehension, behind Luke's person. "Stand aside, Luke."

"I stir not," replied Luke. "I thank you for your good intention, and
will not injure you--that is, if you do not force me to do so. I am here
to defend her ladyship."

"What's that you say?" returned Jack, in surprise--"_defend_ her
ladyship?"

"With my life," replied Luke. "Let me counsel you to depart."

"Are you mad? Defend her--Lady Rookwood--your enemy--who would hang you?
Tut, tut! Stand aside, I say, Luke Bradley, or look to yourself."

"You had better consider well ere you proceed," said Luke. "You know me
of old. I have taken odds as great, and not come off the vanquished."

"The odds are even," cried Titus, "if Mr. Coates will but show fight.
I'll stand by you to the last, my dear boy. You're the right son of your
father, though on the wrong side. Och! Jack Palmer, my jewel, no wonder
you resemble Dick Turpin."

"You hear this?" cried Luke.

"Hot-headed fool!" muttered Jack.

"Why don't you shoot him on the spot?" said Wilder.

"And mar my own chance," thought Jack. "No, that will never do; his life
is not to be thrown away. Be quiet," said he, in a whisper to Wilder;
"I've another card to play, which shall serve us better than all the
plunder here. No harm must come to that youngster; his life is worth
thousands to us." Then, turning to Luke, he continued, "I'm loth to hurt
you; yet what can I do? You must have the worst of it if we come to a
pitched battle. I therefore advise you, as a friend, to draw off your
forces. We are three to three, it is true; but two of _your_ party are
unarmed."

"Unarmed!" interrupted Titus. "Devil burn me! this iron shillelah shall
convince you to the contrary, Jack, or any of your friends."

"Make ready then, my lads," cried Palmer.

"Stop a minute," exclaimed Coates. "This gets serious; it will end in
homicide--in murder. We shall all have our throats cut to a certainty;
and though these rascals will as certainly be hanged for it, that will
be poor satisfaction to the sufferers. Had we not better refer the
matter to arbitration?"

"I'm for fighting it out," said Titus, whisking the poker round his head
like a flail in action. "My blood's up. Come on, Jack Palmer, I'm for
you."

"I should vote for retreating," chattered the attorney, "if that cursed
fellow had not placed a _ne exeat_ at the door."

"Give the word, captain," cried Rust, impatiently.

"Ay, ay," echoed Wilder.

"A skilful general always parleys," said Jack. "A word in your ear,
Luke, ere that be done which cannot be undone."

"You mean me no treachery?" returned Luke.

Jack made no answer, but uncocking his pistols, deposited them within
his pockets.

"Shoot him as he advances," whispered Coates; "he is in your power now."

"Scoundrel!" replied Luke, "do you think me as base as yourself?"

"Hush, hush! for God's sake don't expose me," said Coates.

Lady Rookwood had apparently listened to this singular conference with
sullen composure, though in reality she was racked with anxiety as to
its results; and, now apprehending that Palmer was about to make an
immediate disclosure to Luke, she accosted him as he passed her.

"Unbind me!" cried she, "and what you wish shall be
yours--money--jewels----"

"Ha! may I depend?"

"I pledge my word."

Palmer untied the cord, and Lady Rookwood, approaching a table whereon
stood the escritoire, touched a spring, and a secret drawer flew open.

"You do this of your own free will?" asked Luke. "Speak, if it be
otherwise."

"I do," returned the lady, hastily.

Palmer's eyes glistened at the treasures exposed to his view.

"They are jewels of countless price. Take them, and rid me," she added
in a whisper, "of _him_."

"Luke Bradley?"

"Ay."

"Give them to me."

"They are yours freely on those terms."

"You hear that, Luke," cried he, aloud; "you hear it, Titus; this is no
robbery. Mr. Coates--'Know all men by these _presents_'--I call you to
witness, Lady Rookwood gives me these pretty things."

"I do," returned she; adding, in a whisper, "on the terms which I
proposed."

"Must it be done at once?"

"Without an instant's delay."

"Before your own eyes?"

"I fear not to look on. Each moment is precious. He is off his guard
now. You do it, you know, in self-defence."

"And you?"

"For the same cause."

"Yet he came here to aid you?"

"What of that?"

"He would have risked his life for yours?"

"I cannot pay back the obligation. He must die!"

"The document?"

"Will be useless then."

"Will not that suffice; why aim at life?"

"You trifle with me. You fear to do it."

"_Fear!_"

"About it, then; you shall have more gold."

"I will about it," cried Jack, throwing the casket to Wilder, and
seizing Lady Rookwood's hands. "I am no Italian bravo, madam--no
assassin--no remorseless cut-throat. What are you--devil or woman--who
ask me to do this? Luke Bradley, I say."

"Would you betray me?" cried Lady Rookwood.

"You have betrayed yourself, madam. Nay, nay, Luke, hands off. See, Lady
Rookwood, how you would treat a friend. This strange fellow would blow
out my brains for laying a finger upon your ladyship."

"I will suffer no injury to be done to her," said Luke; "release her."

"Your ladyship hears him," said Jack. "And you, Luke, shall learn the
value set upon your generosity. You will not have _her_ injured. This
instant she has proposed, nay, paid for _your_ assassination."

"How?" exclaimed Luke, recoiling.

"A lie, as black as hell," cried Lady Rookwood.

"A truth, as clear as heaven," retained Jack. "I will speedily convince
you of the fact." Then, turning to Lady Rookwood, he whispered, "Shall I
give him the marriage document?"

"Beware!" said Lady Rookwood.

"Do I avouch the truth, then?"

She was silent.

"I am answered," said Luke.

"Then leave her to her fate," cried Jack.

"No," replied Luke; "she is still a woman, and I will not abandon her to
ruffianly violence. Set her free."

"You are a fool," said Jack.

"Hurrah, hurrah!" vociferated Coates, who had rushed to the window.
"Rescue, rescue! they are returning from the church; I see the
torchlight in the avenue; we are saved!"

"Hell and the devil!" cried Jack; "not an instant is to be lost. Alive,
lads; bring off all the plunder you can; be handy!"

"Lady Rookwood, I bid you farewell," said Luke, in a tone in which scorn
and sorrow were blended. "We shall meet again."

"We have not parted yet," returned she; "will you let this man pass? A
thousand pounds for his life."

"Upon the nail?" asked Rust.

"By the living God, if any of you attempt to touch him, I will blow his
brains out upon the spot, be he friend or foe," cried Jack. "Luke
Bradley, _we_ shall meet again. You shall hear from me."

"Lady Rookwood," said Luke, as he departed, "I shall not forget this
night."

"Is all ready?" asked Palmer of his comrades.

"All."

"Then budge."

"Stay!" cried Lady Rookwood, in a whisper to him. "What will purchase
that document?"

"Hem!"

"A thousand pounds?"

"Double it."

"It _shall_ be doubled."

"I will turn it over."

"Resolve me now."

"You shall hear from me."

"In what manner?"

"I will find speedy means."

"Your name is Palmer?"

"Palmer is the name he goes by, your ladyship," replied Coates, "but it
is the fashion with these rascals to have an alias."

"Ha! ha!" said Jack, thrusting the ramrod into his pistol-barrel, "are
you there, Mr. Coates? Pay your wager, sir."

"What wager?"

"The hundred we bet that you would take me if ever you had the chance."

"Take _you_!--it was Dick Turpin I betted to take."

"_I_ am DICK TURPIN--that's my alias!" replied Jack.

"Dick Turpin! then I'll have a snap at you at all hazards," cried
Coates, springing suddenly towards him.

"And I at you," said Turpin, discharging his pistol right in the face of
the rash attorney; "there's a quittance in full."