_SIR PIERS ROOKWOOD_

    My old master kept a good house, and twenty or thirty tall
    sword-and-buckler men about him; and in faith his son differs not
    much; he will have metal too; though he has no store of cutler's
    blades, he will have plenty of vintners' pots. His father kept a
    good house for honest men, his tenants that brought him in part; and
    his son keeps a bad house with knaves that help to consume all: 'tis
    but the change of time: why should any man repine at it? Crickets,
    good, loving, and lucky worms, were wont to feed, sing, and rejoice
    in the father's chimney; and now carrion crows build in the son's
    kitchen.

                             WILKINS: _Miseries of Enforced Marriage_.


Sir Reginald died, leaving issue three children: a daughter, the
before-mentioned Eleanor--who, entirely discountenanced by the family,
had been seemingly forgotten by all but her father--, and two sons by
his third wife. Reginald, the eldest, whose military taste had early
procured him the command of a company of horse, and whose politics did
not coalesce with those of his sire, fell, during his father's lifetime,
at Killiecrankie, under the banners of William. Piers, therefore, the
second son, succeeded to the title.

A very different character, in many respects, from his father and
brother, holding in supreme dislike courts and courtiers, party warfare,
political intrigue, and all the subtleties of Jesuitical diplomacy,
neither having any inordinate relish for camps or campaigns, Sir Piers
Rookwood yet displayed in early life one family propensity, viz.,
unremitting devotion to the sex. Among his other mistresses was the
unfortunate Susan Bradley, in whom by some he was supposed to have been
clandestinely united. In early youth, as has been stated, Sir Piers
professed the faith of Rome, but shortly after the death of his
beautiful mistress--or wife, as it might be--, having quarreled with his
father's confessor, Checkley, he publicly abjured his heresies. Sir
Piers subsequently allied himself to Maud, only daughter of Sir Thomas
D'Aubeny, the last of a line as proud and intolerant as his own. The
tables were then turned. Lady Rookwood usurped sovereign sway over her
lord and Sir Piers, a cipher in his own house, scarce master of himself,
much less of his dame, endured an existence so miserable, that he was
often heard to regret, in his cups, that he had not inherited, with the
estate of his forefathers, the family secret of shaking off the
matrimonial yoke, when found to press too hardly.

At the onset, Sir Piers struggled hard to burst his bondage. But in
vain--he was fast fettered; and only bruised himself, like the caged
lark, against the bars of his prison-house. Abandoning all further
effort at emancipation, he gave himself up to the usual resource of a
weak mind, debauchery; and drank so deeply to drown his cares, that, in
the end, his hale constitution yielded to his excesses. It was even
said, that remorse at his abandonment of the faith of his fathers had
some share in his misery; and that his old spiritual, and if report
spoke truly, sinful adviser, Father Checkley, had visited him secretly
at the hall. Sir Piers was observed to shudder whenever the priest's
name was mentioned.

Sir Piers Rookwood was a good-humored man in the main, had little of the
old family leaven about him, and was esteemed by his associates. Of
late, however, his temper became soured, and his friends deserted him;
for, between his domestic annoyances, remorseful feelings, and the
inroads already made upon his constitution by constant inebriety, he
grew so desperate and insane in his revels, and committed such fearful
extravagances, that even his boon companions shrank from his orgies.
Fearful were the scenes between him and Lady Rookwood upon these
occasions--appalling to the witnesses, dreadful to themselves. And it
was, perhaps, their frequent recurrence, that, more than anything else,
banished all decent society from the hall.

At the time of Sir Piers's decease, which brings us down to the date of
our story, his son and successor, Ranulph, was absent on his travels.
Shortly after the completion of his academical education, he had
departed to make the tour of the Continent, and had been absent rather
better than a year. He had quitted his father in displeasure, and was
destined never again to see his face while living. The last intelligence
received of young Rookwood was from Bordeaux, whence it was thought he
had departed for the Pyrenees. A special messenger had been despatched
in search of him, with tidings of the melancholy event. But, as it was
deemed improbable by Lady Rookwood that her son could return within any
reasonable space, she gave directions for the accomplishment of the
funeral rites of her husband on the sixth night after his decease--it
being the custom of the Rookwoods ever to inter their dead at
midnight,--intrusting their solemnization entirely to the care of one of
Sir Piers's hangers-on--Dr. Titus Tyrconnel,--for which she was greatly
scandalized in the neighborhood.

Ranulph Rookwood was a youth of goodly promise. The stock from which he
sprang would on neither side warrant such conclusion. But it sometimes
happens that from the darkest elements are compounded the brightest and
subtlest substances; and so it occurred in this instance. Fair, frank,
and free--generous, open, unsuspicious--he seemed the very opposite of
all his race--their antagonizing principle. Capriciously indulgent, his
father had allowed him ample means, neither curbing nor restraining his
expenditure; acceding at one moment to every inclination, and the next
irresolutely opposing it. It was impossible, therefore, for him, in such
a state of things, to act decidedly, without incurring his father's
displeasure; and the only measure he resolved upon, which was to absent
himself for a time, was conjectured to have brought about the result he
had endeavored to avoid. Other reasons, however, there were, which
secretly influenced him, which it will be our business in due time to
detail.