_RANULPH ROOKWOOD_

     _Fer._ Yes, Francisco,
            He hath left his curse upon me.

    _Fran._ How?

     _Fer._ His curse I dost comprehend what that word carries?
            Shot from a father's angry breath? Unless
            I tear poor Felisarda from my heart,
            He hath pronounced me heir to all his curses.

                                              SHIRLEY: _The Brothers_.


"There is nothing, I trust, my dear young friend, and quondam pupil,"
said Dr. Small, as the door was closed, "that weighs upon your mind,
beyond the sorrow naturally incident to an affliction, severe as the
present. Forgive my apprehensions if I am wrong. You know the
affectionate interest I have ever felt for you--an interest which, I
assure you, is nowise diminished, and which will excuse my urging you to
unburden your mind to me; assuring yourself, that whatever may be your
disclosure, you will have my sincere sympathy and commiseration. I may
be better able to advise with you, should counsel be necessary, than
others, from my knowledge of your character and temperament. I would not
anticipate evil, and am, perhaps, unnecessarily apprehensive. But I own,
I am startled at the incoherence of your expressions, coupled with your
sudden and almost mysterious appearance at this distressing conjuncture.
Answer me: has your return been the result of mere accident? is it to be
considered one of those singular circumstances which almost look like
fate, and baffle our comprehension? or were you nearer home than we
expected, and received the news of your father's demise through some
channel unknown to us? Satisfy my curiosity, I beg of you, upon this
point."

"Your curiosity, my dear sir," replied Ranulph, gravely and sadly, "will
not be decreased, when I tell you, that my return has neither been the
work of chance,--for I came, fully anticipating the dread event, which I
find realized,--nor has it been occasioned by any intelligence derived
from yourself, or others. It was only, indeed, upon my arrival here that
I received full confirmation of my apprehensions. I had another, a more
terrible summons to return."

"What summons? you perplex me!" exclaimed Small, gazing with some
misgiving into the face of his young friend.

"I am myself perplexed--sorely perplexed," returned Ranulph. "I have
much to relate; but I pray you bear with me to the end. I have that on
my mind which, like guilt, must be revealed."

"Speak, then, fearlessly to me," said Small, affectionately pressing
Ranulph's hand, "and assure yourself, beforehand, of my sympathy."

"It will be necessary," said Ranulph, "to preface my narrative by some
slight allusion to certain painful events--and yet I know not why I
should call them painful, excepting in their consequences--which
influenced my conduct in my final interview between my father and
myself--an interview which occasioned my departure for the
Continent--and which was of a character so dreadful, that I would not
even revert to it, were it not a necessary preliminary to the
circumstance I am about to detail.

"When I left Oxford, I passed a few weeks alone, in London. A college
friend, whom I accidentally met, introduced me, during a promenade in
St. James's Park, to some acquaintances of his own, who were taking an
airing in the Mall at the same time--a family whose name was Mowbray,
consisting of a widow lady, her son, and daughter. This introduction was
made in compliance with my own request. I had been struck by the
singular beauty of the younger lady, whose countenance had a peculiar
and inexpressible charm to me, from its marked resemblance to the
portrait of the Lady Eleanor Rookwood, whose charms and unhappy fate I
have so often dwelt upon and deplored. The picture is there," continued
Ranulph, pointing to it: "look at it, and you have the fair creature I
speak of before you; the color of the hair--the tenderness of the eyes.
No--the expression is not so sad, except when----but no matter! I
recognized her features at once.

"It struck me, that upon the mention of my name, the party betrayed some
surprise, especially the elder lady. For my own part, I was so attracted
by the beauty of the daughter, the effect of which upon me seemed rather
the fulfilment of a predestined event, originating in the strange
fascination which the family portrait had wrought in my heart, than the
operation of what is called 'love at first sight,' that I was insensible
to the agitation of the mother. In vain I endeavored to rally myself; my
efforts at conversation were fruitless; I could not talk--all I could do
was silently to yield to the soft witchery of those tender eyes; my
admiration increasing each instant that I gazed upon them.

"I accompanied them home. Attracted as by some irresistible spell, I
could not tear myself away; so that, although I fancied I could perceive
symptoms of displeasure in the looks of both the mother and the son,
yet, regardless of consequences, I ventured, uninvited, to enter the
house. In order to shake off the restraint which I felt my society
imposed, I found it absolutely necessary to divest myself of
bashfulness, and to exert such conversational powers as I possessed. I
succeeded so well that the discourse soon became lively and animated;
and what chiefly delighted me was, that _she_, for whose sake I had
committed my present rudeness, became radiant with smiles. I had been
all eagerness to seek for some explanation of the resemblance to which I
have just alluded, and the fitting moment had, I conceived, arrived. I
called attention to a peculiar expression in the features of Miss
Mowbray, and then instanced the likeness that subsisted between her and
my ancestress. 'It is the more singular,' I said, turning to her mother,
'because there could have been no affinity, that I am aware of, between
them, and yet the likeness is really surprising.'--'It is not so
singular as you imagine,' answered Mrs. Mowbray; 'there _is_ a close
affinity. That Lady Rookwood was my mother. Eleanor Mowbray _does_
resemble her ill-fated ancestress.'

"Words cannot paint my astonishment. I gazed at Mrs. Mowbray,
considering whether I had not misconstrued her speech--whether I had not
so shaped the sounds as to suit my own quick and passionate conceptions.
But no! I read in her calm, collected countenance--in the downcast
glance, and sudden sadness of Eleanor, as well as in the changed and
haughty demeanor of the brother, that I had heard her rightly. Eleanor
Mowbray was my cousin--the descendant of that hapless creature whose
image I had almost worshipped.

"Recovering from my surprise, I addressed Mrs. Mowbray, endeavoring to
excuse my ignorance of our relationship, on the plea that I had not been
given to understand that such had been the name of the gentleman she had
espoused. 'Nor was it,' answered she, 'the name he bore at Rookwood;
circumstances forbade it then. From the hour I quitted that house until
this moment, excepting one interview with my--with Sir Reginald
Rookwood--I have seen none of my family--have held no communication with
them. My brothers have been strangers to me; the very name of Rookwood
has been unheard, unknown; nor would you have been admitted here, had
not accident occasioned it.' I ventured now to interrupt her, and to
express a hope that she would suffer an acquaintance to be kept up,
which had so fortunately commenced, and which might most probably bring
about an entire reconciliation between the families. I was so earnest in
my expostulations, my whole soul being in them, that she inclined a
more friendly ear to me. Eleanor, too, smiled encouragement. Love lent
me eloquence; and at length, as a token of my success, and her own
relenting, Mrs. Mowbray held forth her hand: I clasped it eagerly. It
was the happiest moment of my life.

"I will not trouble you with any lengthened description of Eleanor
Mowbray. I hope, at some period or other, you may still be enabled to
see her, and judge for yourself; for though adverse circumstances have
hitherto conspired to separate us, the time for a renewal of our
acquaintance is approaching, I trust, for I am not yet altogether
without hope. But this much I may be allowed to say, that her rare
endowments of person were only equalled by the graces of her mind.

"Educated abroad, she had all the vivacity of our livelier neighbors,
combined with every solid qualification which we claim as more
essentially our own. Her light and frolic manner was French, certainly;
but her gentle, sincere heart was as surely English. The foreign accent
that dwelt upon her tongue communicated an inexpressible charm, even to
the language which she spoke.

"I will not dwell too long upon this theme. I feel ashamed of my own
prolixity. And yet I am sure you will pardon it. Ah, those bright brief
days! too quickly were they fled! I could expatiate upon each
minute--recall each word--revive each look. It may not be. I must hasten
on. Darker themes await me.

"My love made rapid progress--I became each hour more enamored of my
new-found cousin. My whole time was passed near her; indeed, I could
scarcely exist in absence from her side. Short, however, was destined to
be my indulgence in this blissful state. One happy week was its extent.
I received a peremptory summons from my father to return home.

"Immediately upon commencing this acquaintance, I had written to my
father, explaining every particular attending it. This I should have
done of my own free will, but I was urged to it by Mrs. Mowbray.
Unaccustomed to disguise, I had expatiated upon the beauty of Eleanor,
and in such terms, I fear, that I excited some uneasiness in his breast.
His letter was laconic. He made no allusion to the subject upon which I
had expatiated when writing to him. He commanded me to return.

"The bitter hour was at hand. I could not hesitate to comply. Without my
father's sanction, I was assured Mrs. Mowbray would not permit any
continuance of my acquaintance. Of Eleanor's inclinations I fancied I
had some assurance; but without her mother's consent, to whose will she
was devoted, I felt, had I even been inclined to urge it, that my suit
was hopeless. The letter which I had received from my father made me
more than doubt whether I should not find him utterly adverse to my
wishes. Agonized, therefore, with a thousand apprehensions, I presented
myself on the morning of my departure. It was then I made the
declaration of my passion to Eleanor; it was then that every hope was
confirmed, every apprehension realized. I received from her lips a
confirmation of my fondest wishes; yet were those hopes blighted in the
bud, when I heard, at the same time, that their consummation was
dependent on the will of two others, whose assenting voices, she feared,
could never be obtained. From Mrs. Mowbray I received a more decided
reply. All her haughtiness was aroused. Her farewell words assured me,
that it was indifferent to her whether we met again as relatives or as
strangers. Then was it that the native tenderness of Eleanor displayed
itself, in an outbreak of feeling peculiar to a heart keenly sympathetic
as hers. She saw my suffering--the reserve natural to her sex gave
way--she flung herself into my arms--and so we parted.

"With a heavy foreboding I returned to Rookwood, and, oppressed with the
gloomiest anticipations, endeavored to prepare myself for the worst. I
arrived. My reception was such as I had calculated upon; and, to
increase my distress, my parents had been at variance. I will not pain
you and myself with any recital of their disagreement. My mother had
espoused my cause, chiefly, I fear, with the view of thwarting my poor
father's inclinations. He was in a terrible mood, exasperated by the
fiery stimulants he had swallowed, which had not indeed, drowned his
reason, but roused and inflamed every dormant emotion to violence. He
was as one insane. It was evening when I arrived. I would willingly have
postponed the interview till the morrow. It could not be. He insisted
upon seeing me.

"My mother was present. You know the restraint she usually had over my
father, and how she maintained it. On this occasion she had none. He
questioned me as to every particular; probed my secret soul; dragged
forth every latent feeling, and then thundered out his own determination
that Eleanor never should be bride of mine; nor would he receive, under
his roof, her mother, the discountenanced daughter of his father. I
endeavored to remonstrate with him. He was deaf to my entreaties. My
mother added sharp and stinging words to my expostulations. 'I had her
consent,' she said; 'what more was needed? The lands were entailed. I
should at no distant period be their master, and might then please
myself.' This I mention in order to give you my father's strange answer.

"'Have a care, madam,' replied he, 'and bridle your tongue; they _are_
entailed, 'tis true, but I need not ask _his_ consent to cut off that
entail. Let him dare to disobey me in this particular, and I will so
divert the channel of my wealth, that no drop shall reach him. I
will--but why threaten?--let him do it, and approve the consequences.'

"On the morrow I renewed my importunities, with no better success. We
were alone.

"'Ranulph,' said he, 'you waste time in seeking to change my resolution.
It is unalterable. I have many motives which influence me; they are
inexplicable, but imperative. Eleanor Mowbray never can be yours. Forget
her as speedily as may be, and I pledge myself, upon whomsoever else
your choice may fix, I will offer no obstacle.'

"'But why,' exclaimed I, with vehemence, 'do you object to one whom you
have never beheld? At least, consent to see her.'

"'Never!' he replied, 'The tie is sundered, and cannot be reunited; my
father bound me by an oath never to meet in friendship with my sister; I
will not break my vow, I will not violate its conditions, even in the
second degree. We never can meet again. An idle prophecy which I have
heard has said "_that when a Rookwood shall marry a Rookwood the end of
the house draweth nigh_." That I regard not. It may have no meaning, or
it may have much. To me it imports nothing further, than that, if you
wed Eleanor, every acre I possess shall depart from you. And assure
yourself this is no idle threat. I can, and will do it. My curse shall
be your sole inheritance.'

"I could not avoid making some reply, representing to him how
unjustifiable such a procedure was to me, in a case where the happiness
of my life was at stake; and how inconsistent it was with the charitable
precepts of our faith, to allow feelings of resentment to influence his
conduct. My remonstrances, as in the preceding meeting, were
ineffectual. The more I spoke, the more intemperate he grew. I therefore
desisted, but not before he had ordered me to quit the house. I did not
leave the neighborhood, but saw him again on the same evening.

"Our last interview took place in the garden. I then told him that I had
determined to go abroad for two years, at the expiration of which period
I proposed returning to England; trusting that his resolution might then
be changed, and that he would listen to my request, for the fulfilment
of which I could never cease to hope. Time, I hoped, might befriend me.
He approved of my plan of travelling, requesting me not to see Eleanor
before I set out; adding, in a melancholy tone--'We may never meet
again, Ranulph, in this life; in that case, farewell forever. Indulge no
vain hopes. Eleanor never can be yours, but upon one condition, and to
that you would never consent!'--'Propose it!' I cried; 'there is no
condition I could not accede to.'--'Rash boy!' he replied, 'you know not
what you say; that pledge you would never fulfil, were I to propose it
to you; but no--should I survive till you return, you shall learn it
then--and now, farewell.'--'Speak now, I beseech you!' I exclaimed;
'anything, everything--what you will!'--'Say no more,' replied he,
walking towards the house; 'when you return we will renew this subject;
farewell--perhaps forever!' His words were prophetic--that parting _was_
forever. I remained in the garden till nightfall. I saw my mother, but
_he_ came not again. I quitted England without beholding Eleanor."

"Did you not acquaint her by letter with what had occurred, and your
consequent intentions?" asked Small.

"I did," replied Ranulph; "but I received no reply. My earliest
inquiries will be directed to ascertain whether the family are still in
London. It will be a question for our consideration, whether I am not
justified in departing from my father's expressed wishes, or whether I
should violate his commands in so doing."

"We will discuss that point hereafter," replied Small; adding, as he
noticed the growing paleness of his companion, "you are too much
exhausted to proceed--you had better defer the remainder of your story
to a future period."

"No," replied Ranulph, swallowing a glass of water; "I am exhausted, yet
I cannot rest--my blood is in a fever, which nothing will allay. I shall
feel more easy when I have made the present communication. I am
approaching the sequel of my narrative. You are now in possession of the
story of my love--of the motive of my departure. You shall learn what
was the occasion of my return.

"I had wandered from city to city during my term of exile--consumed by
hopeless passion--with little that could amuse _me_, though surrounded
by a thousand objects of interest to others, and only rendering life
endurable by severest study or most active exertion. My steps conducted
me to Bordeaux;--there I made a long halt, enchanted by the beauty of
the neighboring scenery. My fancy was smitten by the situation of a
villa on the banks of the Garonne, within a few leagues of the city. It
was an old château, with fine gardens bordering the blue waters of the
river, and commanding a multitude of enchanting prospects. The house,
which had in part gone to decay, was inhabited by an aged couple, who
had formerly been servants to an English family, the members of which
had thus provided for them on their return to their own country. I
inquired the name. Conceive my astonishment to find that this château
had been the residence of the Mowbrays. This intelligence decided me at
once--I took up my abode in the house; and a new and unexpected source
of solace and delight was opened to me, I traced the paths she had
traced; occupied the room she had occupied; tended the flowers she had
tended; and, on the golden summer evenings, would watch the rapid
waters, tinged with all the glorious hues of sunset, sweeping past my
feet, and think how _she_ had watched them. Her presence seemed to
pervade the place. I was now comparatively happy, and, anxious to remain
unmolested, wrote home that I was leaving Bordeaux for the Pyrenees, on
my way to Spain."

"That account arrived," observed Small.

"One night," continued Ranulph--"'tis now the sixth since the occurrence
I am about to relate--I was seated in a bower that overlooked the river.
It had been a lovely evening--so lovely, that I lingered there, wrapped
in the heavenly contemplation of its beauties. I watched each rosy tint
reflected upon the surface of the rapid stream--now fading into
yellow--now shining silvery white. I noticed the mystic mingling of
twilight with darkness--of night with day, till the bright current on a
sudden became a black mass of waters. I could scarcely discern a
leaf--all was darkness--when lo! another change! The moon was up--a
flood of light deluged all around--the stream was dancing again in
reflected radiance, and I still lingering at its brink.

"I had been musing for some moments, with my head resting upon my hand,
when, happening to raise my eyes, I beheld a figure immediately before
me. I was astonished at the sight, for I had perceived no one
approach--had heard no footstep advance towards me, and was satisfied
that no one besides myself could be in the garden. The presence of the
figure inspired me with an undefinable awe! and, I can scarce tell why,
but a thrilling presentiment convinced me that it was a supernatural
visitant. Without motion--without life--without substance, it seemed;
yet still the outward character of life was there. I started to my feet.
God! what did I behold? The face was turned to me--my father's face! And
what an aspect, what a look! Time can never efface that terrible
expression; it is graven upon my memory--I cannot describe it. It was
not anger--it was not pain: it was as if an eternity of woe were stamped
upon its features. It was too dreadful to behold, I would fain have
averted my gaze--my eyes were fascinated--fixed--I could not withdraw
them from the ghastly countenance. I shrank from it, yet stirred not--I
could not move a limb. Noiselessly gliding towards me, the apparition
approached. I could not retreat. It stood obstinately beside me. I
became as one half-dead. The phantom shook its head with the deepest
despair; and as the word 'Return!' sounded hollowly in my ears, it
gradually melted from my view. I cannot tell how I recovered from the
swoon into which I fell, but daybreak saw me on my way to England. I am
here. On that night--at that same hour, my father died."

"It was, after all, then, a supernatural summons that you received?"
said Small.

"Undoubtedly," replied Ranulph.

"Humph!--the coincidence, I own, is sufficiently curious," returned
Small, musingly; "but it would not be difficult, I think, to discover a
satisfactory explanation of the delusion."

"There was no delusion," replied Ranulph, coldly; "the figure was as
palpable as your own. Can I doubt, when I behold this result? Could any
deceit have been practised upon me, at that distance?--the precise time,
moreover, agreeing. Did not the phantom bid me return?--I _have_
returned--he is dead. I have gazed upon a being of another world. To
doubt were impious, after that look."

"Whatever my opinions may be, my dear young friend," returned Small,
gravely, "I will suspend them for the present. You are still greatly
excited. Let me advise you to seek some repose."

"I am easier," replied Ranulph; "but you are right, I will endeavor to
snatch a little rest. Something within tells me all is not yet
accomplished. What remains?--I shudder to think of it. I will rejoin you
at midnight. I shall myself attend the solemnity. Adieu!"

Ranulph quitted the room. Small sighingly shook his head, and having
lighted his pipe, was presently buried in a profundity of smoke and
metaphysical speculation.