_THE SHORT PIPE_

    The Peons are capital horsemen, and several times we saw them, at a
    gallop, throw the rein on the horse's neck, take from one pocket a
    bag of loose tobacco, and, with a piece of paper, or a leaf of
    Indian corn, make a cigar, and then take out a flint and steel and
    light it.

                                                 HEAD'S _Rough Notes_.


Away they fly past scattered cottages, swiftly and skimmingly, like
eagles on the wing, along the Enfield highway. All were well mounted,
and the horses, now thoroughly warmed, had got into their paces, and did
their work beautifully. None of Coates's party lost ground, but they
maintained it at the expense of their steeds, which were streaming like
water-carts, while Black Bess had scarcely turned a hair.

Turpin, the reader already knows, was a crack rider; he was _the_ crack
rider of England of his time, and, perhaps, of any time. The craft and
mystery of jockeyship was not so well understood in the eighteenth as it
is in the nineteenth century; men treated their horses differently, and
few rode them as well as many ride now, when every youngster takes to
the field as naturally as if he had been bred a Guacho. Dick Turpin was
a glorious exception to the rule, and anticipated a later age. He rode
wonderfully lightly, yet sat his saddle to perfection, distributing the
weight so exquisitely that his horse scarcely felt his pressure; he
yielded to every movement made by the animal, and became, as it were,
part and parcel of itself; he took care Bess should be neither strained
nor wrung. Freely, and as lightly as a feather, was she borne along;
beautiful was it to see her action--to watch her style and temper of
covering the ground; and many a first-rate Meltonian might have got a
wrinkle from Turpin's seat and conduct.

We have before stated that it was not Dick's object to _ride away_ from
his pursuers--he could have done that at any moment. He liked the fun of
the chase, and would have been sorry to put a period to his own
excitement. Confident in his mare, he just kept her at such speed as
should put his pursuers completely _to it_, without in the slightest
degree inconveniencing himself. Some judgment of the speed at which they
went may be formed, when we state that little better than an hour had
elapsed and nearly twenty miles had been ridden over. "Not bad
travelling that," methinks we hear the reader exclaim.

"By the mother that bore me," said Titus, as they went along in this
slapping style--Titus, by-the-by, rode a big, Roman-nosed, powerful
horse, well adapted to his weight, but which required a plentiful
exercise both of leg and arm to call forth all his action, and keep his
rider alongside his companions--"by the mother that bore me," said he,
almost thumping the wind out of his flea-bitten Bucephalus with his
calves, after the Irish fashion, "if the fellow isn't lighting his pipe!
I saw the sparks fly on each side of him, and there he goes like a smoky
chimney on a frosty morning! See, he turns his impudent phiz, with the
pipe in his mouth! Are we to stand that, Mr. Coates?"

"Wait awhile, sir--wait awhile," said Coates; "we'll smoke _him_
by-and-by."

Pæans have been sung in honor of the Peons of the Pampas by the
_Head_long Sir Francis; but what the gallant major extols so loudly in
the South American horsemen, viz., the lighting of a cigar when in mid
career, was accomplished with equal ease by our English highwayman a
hundred years ago, nor was it esteemed by him any extravagant feat
either. Flint, steel, and tinder were bestowed within Dick's ample
pouch, the short pipe was at hand, and within a few seconds there was a
stream of vapor exhaling from his lips, like the smoke from a steamboat
shooting down the river, and tracking his still rapid course through the
air.

"I'll let 'em see what I think of 'em!" said Dick, coolly, as he turned
his head.

It was now gray twilight. The mists of coming night were weaving a thin
curtain over the rich surrounding landscape. All the sounds and hum of
that delicious hour were heard, broken only by the regular clatter of
the horses' hoofs. Tired of shouting, the chasers now kept on their way
in deep silence; each man held his breath, and plunged his spurs, rowel
deep, into his horse; but the animals were already at the top of their
speed, and incapable of greater exertion. Paterson, who was a hard
rider, and perhaps a thought better mounted, kept the lead. The rest
followed as they might.

Had it been undisturbed by the rush of the cavalcade, the scene would
have been still and soothing. Overhead a cloud of rooks were winging
their garrulous flight to the ancestral avenue of an ancient mansion to
the right; the bat was on the wing; the distant lowing of a herd of kine
saluted the ear at intervals; the blithe whistle of the rustic herdsman,
and the merry chime of waggon bells, rang pleasantly from afar. But
these cheerful sounds, which make the still twilight hour delightful,
were lost in the tramp of the horsemen, now three abreast. The hind fled
to the hedge for shelter, and the waggoner pricked up his ears, and
fancied he heard the distant rumbling of an earthquake.

On rush the pack, whipping, spurring, tugging for very life. Again they
gave voice, in hopes the waggoner might succeed in stopping the
fugitive. But Dick was already by his side. "Harkee, my tulip," cried
he, taking the pipe from his mouth as he passed, "tell my friends behind
they will hear of me at York."

"What did he say?" asked Paterson, coming up the next moment.

"That you'll find him at York," replied the waggoner.

"At York!" echoed Coates, in amaze.

Turpin was now out of sight, and although our trio flogged with might
and main, they could never catch a glimpse of him until, within a short
distance of Ware, they beheld him at the door of a little public house,
standing with his bridle in his hand, coolly quaffing a tankard of ale.
No sooner were they in sight, than Dick vaulted into the saddle, and
rode off.

"Devil seize you, sir! why didn't you stop him?" exclaimed Paterson, as
he rode up. "My horse is dead lame. I cannot go any further. Do you know
what a prize you have missed? Do you know who that was?"

"No, sir, I don't," said the publican. "But I know he gave his mare more
ale than he took himself, and he has given me a guinea instead of a
shilling. He's a regular good 'un."

"A good 'un!" said Paterson; "it was Turpin, the notorious highwayman.
We are in pursuit of him. Have you any horses? our cattle are all
blown."

"You'll find the post-house in the town, gentlemen. I'm sorry I can't
accommodate you. But I keeps no stabling. I wish you a very good
evening, sir." Saying which, the publican retreated to his domicile.

"That's a flash crib, I'll be bound," said Paterson. "I'll chalk you
down, my friend, you may rely upon it. Thus far we're done, Mr. Coates.
But curse me if I give it in. I'll follow him to the world's end first."

"Right, sir--right," said the attorney. "A very proper spirit, Mr.
Constable. You would be guilty of neglecting your duty were you to act
otherwise. You must recollect my father, Mr. Paterson--Christopher, or
Kit Coates; a name as well known at the Old Bailey as Jonathan Wild's.
You recollect him--eh?"

"Perfectly well, sir," replied the chief constable.

"The greatest thief-taker, though I say it," continued Coates, "on
record. I inherit all his zeal--all his ardor. Come along, sir. We shall
have a fine moon in an hour--bright as day. To the post-house! to the
post-house!"

Accordingly to the post-house they went; and, with as little delay as
circumstances admitted, fresh hacks being procured, accompanied by a
postilion, the party again pursued their onward course, encouraged to
believe they were still in the right scent.

Night had now spread her mantle over the earth; still it was not wholly
dark. A few stars were twinkling in the deep, cloudless heavens, and a
pearly radiance in the eastern horizon heralded the rising of the orb of
night. A gentle breeze was stirring; the dews of evening had already
fallen; and the air felt bland and dry. It was just the night one would
have chosen for a ride, if one ever rode by choice at such an hour; and
to Turpin, whose chief excursions were conducted by night, it appeared
little less than heavenly.

Full of ardor and excitement, determined to execute what he had mentally
undertaken, Turpin held on his solitary course. Everything was favorable
to his project; the roads were in admirable condition, his mare was in
like order; she was inured to hard work, had rested sufficiently in town
to recover from the fatigue of her recent journey, and had never been in
more perfect training. "She has now got her wind in her," said Dick;
"I'll see what she can do--hark away, lass--hark away! I wish they could
see her now," added he, as he felt her almost fly away with him.

Encouraged by her master's voice and hand, Black Bess started forward at
a pace which few horses could have equalled, and scarcely any have
sustained so long. Even Dick, accustomed as he was to her magnificent
action, felt electrified at the speed with which he was borne along.
"Bravo! bravo!" shouted he, "hark away, Bess!"

The deep and solemn woods through which they were rushing rang with his
shouts, and the sharp rattle of Bess's hoofs; and thus he held his way,
while, in the words of the ballad,

    Fled past, on right and left, how fast,
      Each forest, grove, and bower;
    On right and left, fled past, how fast,
      Each city, town, and tower.