_THE PARTING_

    No marriage I esteem it, where the friends
    Force love upon their children; where the virgin
    Is not so truly given as betrayed.
    I would not have betrothed people--for
    I can by no means call them lovers--make
    Their rites no wedlock, but a sacrifice.

                                      _Combat of Love and Friendship._


Eleanor Mowbray had witnessed her mother's withdrawal from her side with
much uneasiness, and was with difficulty prevented by Sybil from
breaking upon her conference with the gipsy queen. Barbara's dark eye
was fixed upon them during the whole of the interview, and communicated
an indefinite sense of dread to Eleanor.

"Who--who is that old woman?" asked Eleanor, under her breath. "Never,
even in my wildest dreams, have I seen aught so terrible. Why does she
look so at us? She terrifies me; and yet she cannot mean me ill, or my
mother--we have never injured her?"

"Alas!" sighed Sybil.

"You sigh!" exclaimed Eleanor, in alarm. "Is there any real danger,
then? Help us to avoid it. Quick, warn my mother; she seems agitated.
Oh, let me go to her."

"Hush!" whispered Sybil, maintaining an unmoved demeanor under the
lynx-like gaze of Barbara. "Stir not, as you value your life; you know
not where you are, or what may befall you. Your safety depends upon your
composure. Your life is not in danger; but what is dearer than life,
your love, is threatened with a fatal blow. There is a dark design to
wed you to another."

"Heavens!" ejaculated Eleanor, "and to whom?"

"To Sir Luke Rookwood."

"I would die sooner! Marry _him_? They shall kill me ere they force me
to it!"

"Could you not love him?"

"Love him! I have only seen him within this hour. I knew not of his
existence. He rescued me from peril. I would thank him. I would love
him, if I could, for Ranulph's sake; and yet for Ranulph's sake I hate
him."

"Speak not of him thus to me," said Sybil, angrily. "If _you_ love him
not, _I_ love him. Oh! forgive me, lady; pardon my impatience--my heart
is breaking, yet it has not ceased to beat for him. You say you will die
sooner than consent to this forced union. Your faith shall not be so
cruelly attested. If there must be a victim, I will be the sacrifice.
God grant I may be the only one. Be happy! as happy as I am wretched.
You shall see what the love of a gipsy can do."

As she spoke, Sybil burst into a flood of passionate tears. Eleanor
regarded her with the deepest commiseration; but the feeling was
transient; for Barbara, now advancing, exclaimed: "Hence to your mother.
The bridegroom is waiting: to your mother, girl!" And she motioned
Eleanor fiercely away. "What means this?" continued the old gipsy. "What
have you said to that girl? Did I not caution you against speech with
her? and you have dared to disobey me. You, my grandchild--the daughter
of my Agatha, with whom my slightest wish was law. I abandon you! I
curse you!"

"Oh, curse me not!" cried Sybil. "Add not to my despair."

"Then follow my advice implicitly. Cast off this weakness; all is in
readiness. Luke shall descend into the vaulted chapel, the ceremony
shall there take place--there also shall Eleanor _die_--and there again
shall you be wedded. Take this phial, place it within the folds of your
girdle. When all is over, I will tell you how to use it. Are you
prepared? Shall we set out?"

"I am prepared," replied Sybil, in accents hollow as despair; "but let
me speak with Luke before we go."

"Be brief, then--each moment is precious. Keep a guard upon your tongue.
I will to Mrs. Mowbray. You have placed the phial in safety. A drop will
free you from your troubles."

"'Tis in that hope I guard it," replied Sybil, as she departed in the
direction of Luke. Barbara watched her join him, and then turned shortly
towards Mrs. Mowbray and her daughter.

"You are ill, dear Luke," said Sybil, who had silently approached her
faithless lover; "very ill."

"Ill!" echoed Luke, breaking into frantic laughter. "Ill! Ha, ha!--upon
my wedding-day. No, I am well--well. Your eyes are jaundiced by
jealousy."

"Luke, dear Luke, laugh not thus. It terrifies me. I shall think you
insane. There, you are calmer--you are more like yourself--more human.
You looked just now--oh God! that I should say it of you--as if you were
possessed by demons."

"And if I were possessed, what then?"

"Horrible! hint not at it. You almost make me credit the dreadful tales
I have heard, that on their wedding-day the Rookwoods are subject to the
power of the 'Evil One.'"

"Upon their wedding-day--and _I_ look thus?"

"You do--you do. Oh! cast this frenzy from you."

"She is mine--she is mine! I care not though fiends possess me, if it is
my wedding-day, and Eleanor is my bride. And you say I look like a
Rookwood. Ha, ha!"

"That wild laughter again. Luke, I implore you, hear me one word--my
last----"

"I will not bear reproaches."

"I mean not to reproach you. I come to bless you--to forgive you--to bid
you farewell. Will you not say farewell?"

"Farewell."

"Not so--not so. Mercy! my God! compassionate him and me! My heart will
break with agony. Luke, if you would not kill me, recall that word. Let
not the guilt of my death be yours. 'Tis to save you from that remorse
that I die!"

"Sybil, you have said rightly, I am not myself. I know not what demons
have possession of my soul, that I can behold your agonies without
remorse; that your matchless affection should awaken no return. Yet so
it is. Since the fatal moment when I beheld yon maid, I have loved her."

"No more. _Now_ I can part with you. Farewell!"

"Stay, stay! wretch that I am. Stay, Sybil! If we must part--and that it
_must_ be so I feel--let me receive your pardon, if you can bestow it.
Let me clasp you once more within my arms. May you live to happier
days--may you----"

"Oh, to die thus!" sobbed Sybil, disengaging herself from his embrace.
"Live to happier days, said you? When have _I_ given you reason to
doubt, for an instant, the sincerity of _my_ love, that you should
insult me thus?"

"Then live with me--live for me."

"If you can love me still, I will live as your slave, your minion, your
wife; aught you will have me be. You have raised me from wretchedness.
Oh!" continued she in an altered tone, "have I mistaken your meaning?
Did you utter those words in false compassion for my sufferings?--Speak,
it is not yet too late--all may be well. My fate--my life is in your
hands. If you love me yet--if you can forsake Eleanor, speak--if not, be
silent."

Luke averted his head.

"Enough!" continued Sybil, in a voice of agony; "I understand. May God
forgive you! Fare you well! We shall meet no more."

"Do we part for ever?" asked Luke, without daring to regard her.

"FOR EVER!" answered Sybil.

Before her lover could reply, she shot from his side, and plunging
amidst the dark and dense assemblage near the door, disappeared from
view. An instant after, she emerged into the open air. She stood within
the roofless hall. It was filled with sunshine--with the fresh breath of
morn. The ivied ruins, the grassy floor, the blue vault of heaven,
seemed to greet her with a benignant smile. All was _riant_ and
rejoicing--all, save her heart. Amid such brightness, her sorrow seemed
harsh and unnatural; as she felt the glad influence of day, she was
scarcely able to refrain from tears. It was terrible to leave this
beautiful world, that blue sky, that sunshine, and all she loved--so
young, so soon.

Entering a low arch that yawned within the wall, she vanished like a
ghost at the approach of morn.