STARKNESS


A couple of days later, at two o'clock in the afternoon, Maskull and
Nightspore arrived at Starkness Observatory, having covered the seven
miles from Haillar Station on foot. The road, very wild and lonely, ran
for the greater part of the way near the edge of rather lofty cliffs,
within sight of the North Sea. The sun shone, but a brisk east wind was
blowing and the air was salt and cold. The dark green waves were flecked
with white. Throughout the walk, they were accompanied by the plaintive,
beautiful crying of the gulls.

The observatory presented itself to their eyes as a self-contained
little community, without neighbours, and perched on the extreme end of
the land. There were three buildings: a small, stone-built dwelling
house, a low workshop, and, about two hundred yards farther north, a
square tower of granite masonry, seventy feet in height.

The house and the shop were separated by an open yard, littered with
waste. A single stone wall surrounded both, except on the side facing
the sea, where the house itself formed a continuation of the cliff. No
one appeared. The windows were all closed, and Maskull could have sworn
that the whole establishment was shut up and deserted.

He passed through the open gate, followed by Nightspore, and knocked
vigorously at the front door. The knocker was thick with dust and had
obviously not been used for a long time. He put his ear to the door, but
could hear no movements inside the house. He then tried the handle; the
door was looked.

They walked around the house, looking for another entrance, but there
was only the one door.

"This isn't promising," growled Maskull. "There's no one here..... Now
you try the shed, while I go over to that tower."

Nightspore, who had not spoken half a dozen words since leaving the
train, complied in silence, and started off across the yard. Maskull
passed out of the gate again. When he arrived at the foot of the tower,
which stood some way back from the cliff, he found the door heavily
padlocked. Gazing up, he saw six windows, one above the other at equal
distances, all on the east face—that is, overlooking the sea. Realising
that no satisfaction was to be gained here, he came away again, still
more irritated than before. When he rejoined his friend, Nightspore
reported that the workshop was also locked.

"Did we, or did we not, receive an invitation?" demanded Maskull
energetically.

"The house is empty," replied Nightspore, biting his nails. "Better
break a window."

"I certainly don't mean to camp out till Krag condescends to come."

He picked up an old iron bolt from the yard and, retreating to a safe
distance, hurled it against a sash window on the ground floor. The lower
pane was completely shattered. Carefully avoiding the broken glass,
Maskull thrust his hand through the aperture and pushed back the frame
fastening. A minute later they had climbed through and were standing
inside the house.

The room, which was a kitchen, was in an indescribably filthy and
neglected condition. The furniture scarcely held together, broken
utensils and rubbish lay on the floor instead of on the dust heap,
everything was covered with a deep deposit of dust. The atmosphere was
so foul that Maskull judged that no fresh air had passed into the room
for several months. Insects were crawling on the walls.

They went into the other rooms on the lower floor—a scullery, a barely
furnished dining room, and a storing place for lumber. The same dirt,
mustiness, and neglect met their eyes. At least half a year must have
elapsed since these rooms were last touched, or even entered.

"Does your faith in Krag still hold?" asked Maskull. "I confess mine is
at vanishing point. If this affair isn't one big practical joke, it has
every promise of being one. Krag never lived here in his life."

"Come upstairs first," said Nightspore.

The upstairs rooms proved to consist of a library and three bedrooms.
All the windows were tightly closed, and the air was insufferable. The
beds had been slept in, evidently a long time ago, and had never been
made since. The tumbled, discoloured bed linen actually preserved the
impressions of the sleepers. There was no doubt that these impressions
were ancient, for all sorts of floating dirt had accumulated on the
sheets and coverlets.

"Who could have slept here, do you think?" interrogated Maskull. "The
observatory staff?"

"More likely travellers like ourselves. They left suddenly."

Maskull flung the windows wide open in every room he came to, and held
his breath until he had done so. Two of the bedrooms faced the sea; the
third, the library, the upward-sloping moorland. This library was now
the only room left unvisited, and unless they discovered signs of recent
occupation here Maskull made up his mind to regard the whole business as
a gigantic hoax.

But the library, like all the other rooms, was foul with stale air and
dust-laden. Maskull, having flung the window up and down, fell heavily
into an armchair and looked disgustedly at his friend.

"Now what is your opinion of Krag?"

Nightspore sat on the edge of the table which stood before the window.
"He may still have left a message for us."

"What message? Why? Do you mean in this room?—I see no message."

Nightspore's eyes wandered about the room, finally seeming to linger
upon a glass-fronted wall cupboard, which contained a few old bottles on
one of the shelves and nothing else. Maskull glanced at him and at the
cupboard. Then, without a word, he got up to examine the bottles.

There were four altogether, one of which was larger than the rest. The
smaller ones were about eight inches long. All were torpedo-shaped, but
had flattened bottoms, which enabled them to stand upright. Two of the
smaller ones were empty and unstoppered, the others contained a
colourless liquid, and possessed queer-looking, nozzle-like stoppers
that were connected by a thin metal rod with a catch halfway down the
side of the bottle. They were labelled, but the labels were yellow with
age and the writing was nearly undecipherable. Maskull carried the
filled bottles with him to the table in front of the window, in order to
get better light. Nightspore moved away to make room for him.

He now made out on the larger bottle the words "Solar Back Rays"; and on
the other one, after some doubt, he thought that he could distinguish
something like "Arcturian Back Rays."

He looked up, to stare curiously at his friend. "Have you been here
before, Nightspore?"

"I guessed Krag would leave a message."

"Well, I don't know—it may be a message, but it means nothing to us, or
at all events to me. What are 'back rays'?"

"Light that goes back to its source," muttered Nightspore.

"And what kind of light would that be?"

Nightspore seemed unwilling to answer, but, finding Maskull's eyes still
fixed on him, he brought out: "Unless light pulled, as well as pushed,
how would flowers contrive to twist their heads around after the sun?"

"I don't know. But the point is, what are these bottles for?"

While he was still talking, with his hand on the smaller bottle, the
other, which was lying on its side, accidentally rolled over in such a
manner that the metal caught against the table. He made a movement to
stop it, his hand was actually descending, when—the bottle suddenly
disappeared before his eyes. It had not rolled off the table, but had
really vanished—it was nowhere at all.

Maskull stared at the table. After a minute he raised his brows, and
turned to Nightspore with a smile. "The message grows more intricate."

Nightspore looked bored. "The valve became unfastened. The contents have
escaped through the open window toward the sun, carrying the bottle with
them. But the bottle will be burned up by the earth's atmosphere, and
the contents will dissipate, and will not reach the sun."

Maskull listened attentively, and his smile faded. "Does anything
prevent us from experimenting with this other bottle?"

"Replace it in the cupboard," said Nightspore. "Arcturus is still below
the horizon, and you would succeed only in wrecking the house."

Maskull remained standing before the window, pensively gazing out at the
sunlit moors.

"Krag treats me like a child," he remarked presently. "And perhaps I
really am a child.... My cynicism must seem most amusing to Krag. But
why does he leave me to find out all this by myself—for I don't include
you, Nightspore.... But what time will Krag be here?"

"Not before dark, I expect," his friend replied.