FAREWELL.


Strange and wonderful to tell! Nela, who had never in her life had a
room, nor clothes, nor shoes, nor food, nor sympathy, nor relations,
nor any earthly thing of her own, not even a name--was buried in
a style which caused no small amount of envy among the living in
Socartes. This posthumous splendor was the bitterest irony ever known
in these metalliferous regions. Señorita Florentina, acting on her
generous impulses, consoled herself for the disappointment of not
having been able to help Nela alive, by the satisfaction of doing honor
to her hapless remains after death. Some hard-hearted materialists
criticised her severely; but, for our part, we regarded it as an
additional proof of her refined kind-heartedness.

When Nela was carried to the grave, the curious who came to gaze at
her, thought her almost pretty--wonderful to say! At least so they
said. It was the first time a compliment had ever been paid her. The
funeral was magnificent, and the priests of Villamojada opened their
mouths wide in astonishment when they found themselves receiving money
to pray for the soul of La Canela's daughter. It was bewildering,
amazing, to think that a being whose social importance had been about
equal to that of a worm or a fly, should prove the occasion of so much
burning of tapers, of so much hanging of drapery, and of making so many
choristers and sacristans hoarse. Nay, it was so astounding as to be
positively amusing; nothing else was talked of for at least six weeks.

The surprise, and indeed--to be frank--the indignation of this worthy
little world, culminated one day when two waggons, loaded with enormous
blocks of fine white stone, were descried approaching by the high-road.
In Señana's mind, particularly, a hideous subversion of ideas took
place, a cataclysm resulting in mental chaos, when she brought herself
to believe that those fine white stones were to build Nela's tomb. If
an ox had taken to flying or her husband to making speeches, it could
not have roused her from her stupefaction.

The parish registers of Villamojada were searched, for of course it
was indispensable that she should have a name now she was dead, though
she had done without one during her life; as is proved by this very
history, where she has borne various names. And this indispensable
requisite having been found, and duly placed on the records of the
dead, the magnificent tomb, which stood up proudly among the rustic
crosses of the graveyard at Aldeacorba, had this epitaph engraved on it:

         R. I. P.

  MARÍA MANUELA TELLEZ.

   RECALLED TO HEAVEN

  October the 12th, 186...

And a wreath of flowers prettily carved in the marble, crowned the
inscription. Many months later, when Florentina and Pablo Penáguilas
had been some time married and no one--to tell the truth, for truth is
the first consideration--no one in Aldeacorba de Suso remembered Nela
any longer, some travellers of the tourist genus, in crossing that part
of the country, happened to observe the grand marble sepulchre erected
in the cemetery by the piety and affection of an exemplary friend,
and were struck with admiration. Without more ado they proceeded to
write down in their note-book these remarks, which were subsequently
published under the title of "Sketches from Cantábria," in an English
newspaper.

"The most remarkable object to be seen at Aldeacorba is a magnificent
monument, erected in the cemetery over the grave of a young lady of
rank, famous in that part of the country for her beauty. Doña Mariquita
Manuela Tellez belonged to one of the noblest and wealthiest families
in Cantábria, that of Tellez Giron y de Trastamara. Witty, romantic,
and capricious, she took a fancy to wander about the roads, playing
the guitar and singing Calderon's odes, and she would dress herself up
in rags to enable her to mix with the herd of beggars, pick-pockets,
troubadours, bull-fighters, friars, _hidalgos_, gypsies, and muleteers,
which at the great _kermesas_, constitute that motley scene of Spanish
low life which still exists and always must exist, independent and
picturesque, in spite of the railways and newspapers which have begun
to force their way into the Spanish Peninsula.

"The _abad_[6] of Villamojada wept as he told us of the whims, the
virtues, and the beauty of this wealthy gentlewoman, who, whenever
she appeared at the balls, banquets, or _cañas_ of Madrid, was
distinguished for her aristocratic deportment. The number of
_romanceros_, sonnets and madrigals composed in honor of this noble
damsel by all the Spanish poets, is beyond all calculation."[7]

On reading this I saw at once that the worthy reporters had dreamed
dreams. I determined to tell the truth, and the truth, as I have told
it, has resulted in this book.

       *       *       *       *       *

We must now bid farewell forever to this tomb. We will fix our eyes on
another object, seek out another figure--searching diligently, for he
whom we want is but a small personage, a minute insect, as it were, no
larger on the face of the earth than the Phylloxera on the vine. But we
have found him--there he is, tiny, squalid, a mere atomy. But he lives
and breathes, and will grow great in time. Listen to his story, for it
is an interesting one I promise you.

Well, Sir....

But no; it does not belong to this book. If you like the history of
Marianela, in good time you shall hear that of Celipin.


[6] In some provinces the rector of a parish.

[7] The point of this passage in the original is the misuse of Spanish
words and the introduction of others which are not Spanish. Thus
_Hidalgo_ means a nobleman; and _Kermesas_, Fr., _Kermesse_, Dutch,
_Kermis_, is a name for a fair peculiar to Holland and Belgium.