The Warning


The next two days following her visit to Cliffwood, Nancy Drew went
about the house in a preoccupied state. Alternately quiet and talkative,
she was never without an air of suppressed excitement.

In an attempt to strike a plausible explanation for the strange
happenings at The Mansion, she reviewed every detail of the story
related by the Turnbull sisters.

"It's possible the shadows on the wall at night could have been caused
by the wind blowing the trees," she told herself. "Still, Rosemary is a
practical woman and I'm sure she wouldn't be frightened by a thing like
that."

Before she had visited The Mansion with Rosemary, Nancy had been
inclined to suspect that someone was playing a practical joke on the
Turnbull sisters, but the loss of the diamond bar pin made such a theory
seem unlikely. Without doubt, someone had stolen the pin, but in what
manner, she was unable to guess. Apparently, it had vanished into thin
air.

The longer Nancy reflected on the mystery the more certain she was that
a sinister hand was behind everything. However, she refrained from
disclosing this thought to her father lest he reconsider his promise and
refuse her permission to visit the old house during the week he was to
spend in Chicago.

Carson Drew planned to leave on Thursday. Nancy had written a note to
the Turnbull sisters telling them to expect her on Saturday morning. She
had taken care not to mention the approaching visit to anyone save her
father, and even Hannah Gruen was in ignorance concerning her plans.

On the day set for Mr. Drew's departure, Nancy helped him pack his bag,
and then shortly before train time took him to the railroad station in
her roadster.

"When shall I expect you home?" Nancy inquired, as they stood on the
platform waiting for the train.

"A week from to-day. If you would like me to, I'll stop at Cliffwood on
my return trip. Your story has aroused my interest, Nancy. I'm curious
to have a look at that old stone mansion."

"Oh, I wish you would stop for me," Nancy declared enthusiastically. She
glanced carefully about to see that no one was within hearing distance.
"If I haven't solved the mystery by that time you'll help me, won't
you?"

"Of course I'll do anything I can, but from what you've told me it
sounds like a tough case. I'm not sure that I'll be able to solve it
myself. However, if you fail, I'll try it."

The conversation was cut short as a shrill whistle announced the
approach of the train.

"I'll telegraph you the exact hour of my arrival in Cliffwood," he said
hastily.

"The Turnbulls live some distance from the railroad station, so I'll
meet you in the car," Nancy promised.

"And remember—don't run into danger."

The heavy passenger train came pounding and clanging into the station,
and Mr. Drew picked up his bag. Kissing Nancy good-bye, he made a dash
for the Pullman cars, which were at the rear of the train, far down the
track.

Nancy waited until the train pulled out and then slowly made her way
back to the automobile. Now that her father had actually departed, she
felt lonesome.

"I may as well stop at Helen Corning's before I go home," she decided as
she stepped into the roadster. Helen Corning had been her chum for
years.

Accordingly, she called at the home of her chum and was pleased to find
her there. Helen promptly tempted her into a lively game of tennis, and
before Nancy realized it, the afternoon was nearly gone.

"You must stay for dinner," Helen urged. "It won't be any fun eating at
home all alone."

"But Hannah is expecting me."

"We can telephone her."

"Oh, all right," Nancy gave in.

Not only did she stay for dinner, but she remained during the evening,
for Helen would not permit her to go.

"Remember the fun we had at Moon Lake last summer?" Helen asked her.
"You know, I never did entirely forgive you for cheating me out of a
share in your adventure. Why didn't you tell me you were going to chase
robbers that day when you left camp?"

"I didn't know it myself then."

"Well, if you ever stumble upon another mystery, I want you to take me
in on it!"

Nancy was on the verge of telling Helen about her proposed trip to The
Mansion, but she could not bring herself to the point of revealing the
secret. Helen's intentions were of the best, but she was a natural born
gossip and Nancy doubted that it would be possible for her to keep the
matter to herself.

"It might do a great deal of harm if it were rumored why I am leaving
town," she thought. "No, I'll tell Helen after I return."

It was late when Nancy reached home and the housekeeper had retired.

"I'm too sleepy to pack my bag to-night," she decided as she locked the
doors and windows. "I'll do it the first thing in the morning."

But in the morning there were other matters which claimed Nancy's
attention. She had promised the housekeeper a week's vacation during her
visit in Cliffwood, and before the house could be closed there were many
things to be done. The entire day had slipped away almost before she
realized it.

"Miss Nancy, if you don't mind, I'll go to a moving picture show with my
sister," the housekeeper said to her after the dinner dishes had been
cleared away.

"Why, of course, Hannah," she agreed generously. "I don't mind in the
least. I'll be busy with my packing."

As soon as Hannah had left the house, Nancy went directly to her room
and began sorting out the dresses that she planned to take with her to
The Mansion. It was ten minutes after eleven when she finished.

"There, I guess that's all," she decided. "Oh, no, I've forgotten the
revolver Dad gave me. I must take that!"

She hurried downstairs and went directly to the desk where the revolver
had been left. But with her hand on the drawer, Nancy hesitated.

Uneasily, she glanced about the room. For a reason she could not
explain, she felt that someone was watching her.

"I guess my nerves are getting jumpy," she thought. "I do wish Hannah
would come home."

Upon impulse, she moved toward the window. As she took a step forward,
she thought she heard a step on the porch. Was it only imagination or
was someone really prowling about the house?

Before she could make a move to investigate, the doorbell rang sharply.

Nancy started.

"It must be Hannah," she assured herself. "Probably she forgot her key."

But as she crossed the room she distinctly heard the steps creak under
the weight of some person. Hesitating but an instant, she opened the
door.

There was no one in sight. Wonderingly, Nancy stepped out upon the
veranda and glanced up and down the street.

"That's strange," she murmured uncomfortably.

She went to the edge of the porch and peered in the direction of the
hedge. Was it possible someone was hiding in the bushes? A careful
survey disclosed no human form.

As she turned to go inside the house, her eyes fell upon a white
envelope near the door. Curiously, Nancy picked it up and held it to the
light.

"Why, it's addressed to me!" she gasped in astonishment, as she made out
the bold scrawl.

Hastily entering the house and closing the door behind her, Nancy Drew
ripped open the envelope. As she scanned the note, the color faded from
her face.

"An anonymous message!" she whispered. "Someone has sent me a
threatening letter!"