The two personages whom we have mentioned, Indiana Delmare and Sir
Ralph, or, if you prefer, Monsieur Rodolphe Brown, continued to face
each other, as calm and cold as if the husband were standing between
them. The Englishman had no idea of justifying himself, and Madame
Delmare realized that she had no serious grounds for reproaching him,
for he had spoken with no evil intention. At last, making an effort, she
broke the silence and upbraided him mildly.

"That was not well done of you, my dear Ralph," she said. "I had
forbidden you to repeat the words that I let slip in a moment of pain,
and Monsieur Delmare is the last person in the world whom I should want
told of my trouble."

"I can't understand you, my dear," Sir Ralph replied; "you are ill and
you refuse to take care of yourself. I had to choose between the chance
of losing you and the necessity of letting your husband know."

"Yes," said Madame Delmare, with a sad smile, "and you decided to
_notify the authorities._"

"You are wrong, you are wrong, on my word, to allow yourself to inveigh
so against the colonel; he is a man of honor, a worthy man."

"And who says that he's not, Sir Ralph?"

"Why, you do, without meaning to. Your depression, your ailing
condition, and, as he himself observes, your red eyes, tell everybody
every hour in the day that you are not happy."

"Hush, Sir Ralph, you go too far. I have never given you permission to
find out so much."

"I anger you, I see; but what would you have! I am not clever; I am not
acquainted with the subtle distinctions of your language, and then, too,
I resemble your husband in many ways. Like him I am utterly in the dark
as to what a man must say to a woman, either in English or in French, to
console her. Another man would have conveyed to your mind, without
putting it in words, the idea that I have just expressed so awkwardly;
he would have had the art to insinuate himself into your confidence
without allowing you to detect his progress, and perhaps he would have
succeeded in affording some relief to your heart, which puts fetters on
itself and locks itself up before me. This is not the first time that I
have noticed how much more influence words have upon women than ideas,
especially in France. Women more than----"

"Oh! you have a profound contempt for women, my dear Ralph. I am alone
here against two of you, so I must make up my mind never to be right."

"Put us in the wrong, my dear cousin, by recovering your health, your
good spirits, your bloom, your animation of the old days; remember Ile
Bourbon and that delightful retreat of ours, Bernica, and our happy
childhood, and our friendship, which is as old as you are yourself."

"I remember my father, too," said Indiana, dwelling sadly upon the words
and placing her hand in Sir Ralph's.

They relapsed into profound silence.

"Indiana," said Ralph, after a pause, "happiness is always within our
reach. Often one has only to put out his hand to grasp it. What do you
lack? You have modest competence, which is preferable to great wealth,
an excellent husband, who loves you with all his heart, and, I dare to
assert, a sincere and devoted friend."

Madame Delmare pressed Sir Ralph's hand faintly, but she did not change
her attitude; her head still hung forward on her breast and her
tear-dimmed eyes were fixed on the magic effects produced by the embers.

"Your depression, my dear friend," continued Sir Ralph, "is due purely
to physical causes; which one of us can escape disappointment, vexation?
Look below you and you will see people who envy you, and with good
reason. Man is so constituted that he always aspires to what he has
not."

I spare you a multitude of other commonplaces which the excellent Sir
Ralph put forth in a tone as monotonous and sluggish as his thoughts. It
was not that Sir Ralph was a fool, but he was altogether out of his
element. He lacked neither common sense nor shrewdness; but the rôle of
consoler of women was, as he himself acknowledged, beyond his capacity.
And this man had so little comprehension of another's grief, that with
the best possible disposition to furnish a remedy, he could not touch it
without inflaming it. He was so conscious of his awkwardness that he
rarely ventured to take notice of his friend's sorrows; and on this
occasion he made superhuman efforts to perform what he considered the
most painful duty of friendship.

When he saw that Madame Delmare was obliged to make an effort to listen
to him, he held his peace, and naught could be heard save the
innumerable little voices whispering in the burning wood, the plaintive
song of the log as it becomes heated and swells, the crackling of the
bark as it curls before breaking, and the faint phosphorescent
explosions of the alburnum, which emits a bluish flame. From time to
time the baying of a dog mingled with the whistling of the wind through
the cracks of the door and the beating of the rain against the
windowpanes. That evening was one of the saddest that Madame Delmare had
yet passed in her little manor-house in Brie.

Moreover, an indefinable vague feeling of suspense weighed upon that
impressionable soul and its delicate fibres. Weak creatures live on
alarms and presentiments. Madame Delmare had all the superstitions of a
nervous, sickly Creole; certain nocturnal sounds, certain phases of the
moon were to her unfailing presages of specific events, of impending
misfortunes, and the night spoke to that dreamy, melancholy creature a
language full of mysteries and phantoms which she alone could understand
and translate according to her fears and her sufferings.

"You will say again that I am mad," she said, withdrawing her hand,
which Sir Ralph still held, "but some disaster, I don't know what, is
preparing to fall upon us. Some danger is impending over
someone--myself, no doubt--but, look you, Ralph, I feel intensely
agitated, as at the approach of a great crisis in my destiny. I am
afraid," she added, with a shudder, "I feel faint."

And her lips became as white as her cheeks. Sir Ralph, terrified, not by
Madame Delmare's presentiments, which he looked upon as symptoms of
extreme mental exhaustion, but by her deathly pallor, pulled the
bell-rope violently to summon assistance. No one came, and as Indiana
grew weaker and weaker, Sir Ralph, more alarmed in proportion, moved her
away from the fire, deposited her in a reclining chair, and ran through
the house at random, calling the servants, looking for water or salts,
finding nothing, breaking all the bell-ropes, losing his way in the
labyrinth of dark rooms, and wringing his hands with impatience and
anger against himself.

At last it occurred to him to open the glass door that led into the
park, and to call alternately Lelièvre and Noun, Madame Delmare's
Creole maid.

A few moments later Noun appeared from one of the dark paths in the
park, and hastily inquired if Madame Delmare were worse than usual.

"She is really ill," replied Sir Ralph.

They returned to the salon and devoted themselves to the task of
restoring the unconscious Madame Delmare, one with all the ardor of
useless and awkward zeal, the other with the skill and efficacy of
womanly affection.

Noun was Madame Delmare's foster-sister; the two young women had been
brought up together and loved each other dearly. Noun was tall and
strong, glowing with health, active, alert, overflowing with ardent,
passionate creole blood; and she far outshone with her resplendent
beauty the frail and pallid charms of Madame Delmare; but the tenderness
of their hearts and the strength of their attachment killed every
feeling of feminine rivalry.

When Madame Delmare recovered consciousness, the first thing that she
observed was the unusual expression of her maid's features, the damp and
disordered condition of her hair and the excitement which was manifest
in her every movement.

"Courage, my poor child," she said kindly; "my illness is more
disastrous to you than to myself. Why, Noun, you are the one to take
care of yourself; you are growing thin and weeping as if it were not
your destiny to live; dear Noun, life is so bright and fair before you!"

Noun pressed Madame Delmare's hand to her lips effusively, and said, in
a sort of frenzy, glancing wildly about the room:

"_Mon Dieu!_ madame, do you know why Monsieur Delmare is in the park?"

"Why?" echoed Indiana, losing instantly the faint flush that had
reappeared on her cheeks. "Wait a moment--I don't know--You frighten me!
What is the matter, pray?"

"Monsieur Delmare declares that there are thieves in the park," replied
Noun in a broken voice. "He is making the rounds with Lelièvre, both
armed with guns."

"Well?" said Indiana, apparently expecting some shocking news.

"Why, madame," rejoined Noun, clasping her hands frantically, "isn't it
horrible to think that they are going to kill a man?"

"Kill a man!" cried Madame Delmare, springing to her feet with the
terrified credulity of a child frightened by it's nurse's tales.

"Ah! yes, they will kill him," said Noun, stifling her sobs.

"These two women are mad," thought Sir Ralph, who was watching this
strange scene with a bewildered air. "Indeed," he added mentally, "all
women are."

"But why do you say that, Noun," continued Madame Delmare; "do you
believe that there are any thieves there?"

"Oh! if they were really thieves! but some poor peasant perhaps, who has
come to pick up a handful of wood for his family!"

"Yes, that would be ghastly, as you say! But it is not probable; right
at the entrance to Fontainebleau forest, when it is so easy to steal
wood there, nobody would take the risk of a park enclosed by walls. Bah!
Monsieur Delmare won't find anybody in the park, so don't you be
afraid."

But Noun was not listening; she walked from the window to her mistress's
chair, her ears strained to catch the slightest sound; she seemed torn
between the longing to run after Monsieur Delmare and the desire to
remain with the invalid.

Her anxiety seemed so strange, so uncalled-for to Monsieur Brown, that
he laid aside his customary mildness of manner, and said, grasping her
arm roughly:

"Have you lost your wits altogether? don't you see that you frighten
your mistress and that your absurd alarms have a disastrous effect upon
her?"

Noun did not hear him; she had turned her eyes upon her mistress, who
had just started on her chair as if the concussion of the air had
imparted an electric shock to her senses. Almost at the same instant the
report of a gun shook the windows of the salon, and Noun fell upon her
knees.

"What miserable woman's terrors!" cried Sir Ralph, worn out by their
emotion; "in a moment a dead rabbit will be brought to you in triumph,
and you will laugh at yourselves."

"No, Ralph," said Madame Delmare, walking with a firm step toward the
door, "I tell you that human blood has been shed."

Noun uttered a piercing shriek and fell upon her face.

The next moment they heard Lelièvre's voice in the park:

"He's there! he's there! Well aimed, my colonel! the brigand is down!"

Sir Ralph began to be excited. He followed Madame Delmare. A few moments
later a man covered with blood and giving no sign of life was brought
under the peristyle.

"Not so much noise! less shrieking!" said the colonel with rough gayety
to the terrified servants who crowded around the wounded man; "this is
only a joke; my gun was loaded with nothing but salt. Indeed I don't
think I touched him; he fell from fright."

"But what about this blood, monsieur?" said Madame Delmare in a
profoundly reproachful tone, "was it fear that caused it to flow?"

"Why are you here, madame?" cried Monsieur Delmare, "what are you doing
here?"

"I have come to repair the harm that you have done, as it is my duty to
do," replied Madame Delmare coldly.

She walked up to the wounded man with a courage of which no one of the
persons present had as yet felt capable, and held a light to his face.
Thereupon, instead of the plebeian features and garments which they
expected to see, they discovered a young man with noble features and
fashionably dressed, albeit in hunting costume. He had a trifling wound
on one hand, but his torn clothes and his swoon indicated a serious
fall.

"I should say as much!" said Lelièvre; "he fell from a height of twenty
feet. He was just putting his leg over the wall when the colonel fired,
and a few grains of small shot or salt in the right hand prevented his
getting a hold. The fact is, I saw him fall, and when he got to the
bottom he wasn't thinking much about running away, poor devil!"

"Would any one believe," said one of the female servants, "that a man so
nicely dressed would amuse himself by stealing?"

"And his pockets are full of money!" said another, who had unbuttoned
the supposed thief's waistcoat.

"It is very strange," said the colonel, gazing, not without emotion, at
the man stretched out before him. "If the man is dead it's not my fault;
examine his hand, madame, and see if you can find a particle of lead in
it."

"I prefer to believe you, monsieur," replied Madame Delmare, who, with a
self-possession and moral courage of which no one would have deemed her
capable, was closely scrutinizing his pulse and the arteries of his
neck. "Certainly," she added, "he is not dead, and he requires speedy
attention. The man hasn't the appearance of a thief and perhaps he
deserves our care; even if he does not deserve it, our duty calls upon
us women to care for him none the less."

Thereupon Madame Delmare ordered the wounded man to be carried to the
billiard room, which was nearest. A mattress was placed on several
chairs, and Indiana, assisted by her women, busied herself in dressing
the wounded hand, while Sir Ralph, who had some surgical knowledge, drew
a large quantity of blood from him.

Meanwhile, the colonel, much embarrassed, found himself in the position
of a man who has shown more ill-temper than he intended to show. He felt
the necessity of justifying himself in the eyes of the others, or rather
of making them justify him in his own eyes. So he had remained under the
peristyle, surrounded by his servants, and indulging with them in the
excited, prolix and perfectly useless disquisitions which are always
forthcoming after the event. Lelièvre had already explained twenty
times, with the most minute details, the shot, the fall and its results,
while the colonel, who had recovered his good-nature among his own
people, according to his custom, after giving way to his anger,
impeached the purposes of a man who entered private property in the
night-time over the wall. Every one agreed with the master, when the
gardener, quietly leading him aside, assured him that the thief was the
living image of a young land-owner who had recently settled in the
neighborhood, and whom he had seen talking with Mademoiselle Noun three
days before at the rustic fête at Rubelles.

This information gave a different turn to Monsieur Delmare's ideas; on
his ample forehead, bald and glistening, appeared a huge swollen vein,
which was always the precursor of a tempest.

"Morbleu!" he said, clenching his fists, "Madame Delmare takes a deal of
interest in this puppy, who sneaks into my park over the wall!"

And he entered the billiard room, pale and trembling with wrath.