Two months have passed. Nothing is changed at Lagny, in that house to
which I introduced you one winter evening, except that all about its red
brick walls with their frame of gray stone and its slated roofs yellowed
by venerable moss, the springtime is in its bloom. The family is
scattered here and there, enjoying the mild and fragrant evening air;
the setting sun gilds the window-panes and the roar of the factory
mingles with the various noises of the farm. Monsieur Delmare is seated
on the steps, gun in hand, practising at shooting swallows on the wing.
Indiana, at her embroidery frame near the window of the salon, leans
forward now and then to watch with a sad face the colonel's cruel
amusement in the courtyard. Ophelia leaps about and barks, indignant at
a style of hunting so contrary to her habits; and Sir Ralph, astride the
stone railing, is smoking a cigar and, as usual, looking on impassively
at other people's pleasure or vexation.

"Indiana," cried the colonel, laying aside his gun, "do for heaven's
sake put your work away; you tire yourself out as if you were paid so
much an hour."

"It is still broad daylight," Madame Delmare replied.

"No matter; come to the window, I have something to tell you."

Indiana obeyed, and the colonel, drawing near the window, which was
almost on a level with the ground, said to her with as near an approach
to playfulness of manner as an old and jealous husband can manage:

"As you have worked hard to-day and as you are very good, I am going to
tell you something that will please you."

Madame Delmare struggled hard to smile; her smile would have driven a
more sensitive man than the colonel to despair.

"You will be pleased to know," he continued, "that I have invited one of
your humble adorers to breakfast with you to-morrow, to divert you. You
will ask me which one; for you have a very pretty collection of them,
you flirt!"

"Perhaps it's our dear old curé?" said Madame Delmare, whose melancholy
was enhanced by her husband's gayety.

"Oh! no, indeed!"

"Then it must be the mayor of Chailly or the old notary from
Fontainebleau."

"Oh! the craft of women! You know very well that it would be none of
those people. Come, Ralph, tell madame the name she has on the tip of
her tongue but doesn't choose to pronounce herself."

"You need not go through so much preparation to announce a visit from
Monsieur de Ramière," said Sir Ralph, tranquilly, as he threw away his
cigar; "I suppose that it's a matter of perfect indifference to her."

Madame Delmare felt the blood rush to her cheeks; she made a pretence of
looking for something in the salon, then returned to the window with as
calm a manner as she could command.

"I fancy that this is a jest," she said, trembling in every limb.

"On the contrary I am perfectly serious; you will see him here at eleven
o'clock to-morrow."

"What! the man who stole into your premises to obtain unfair possession
of your invention, and whom you almost killed as a criminal! You must
both be very pacific to forget such grievances!"

"You set me the example, dearest, by receiving him very graciously at
your aunt's, where he called on you."

Indiana turned pale.

"I do not by any means appropriate that call," she said earnestly, "and
I am so little flattered by it that, if I were in your place, I would
not receive him."

"You women are all false and cunning just for the pleasure of being so.
You danced with him during one whole ball, I was told."

"You were misinformed."

"Why, it was your aunt herself who told me! However, you need not defend
yourself so warmly; I have no fault to find, as your aunt desired and
assisted to bring about this reconciliation between us. Monsieur de
Ramière has been seeking it for a long while. He has rendered me some
very valuable services with respect to my business, and he has done it
without ostentation and almost without my knowledge; so, as I am not so
savage as you say, and also as I do not choose to be under obligations
to a stranger, I determined to make myself square with him."

"How so?"

"By making a friend of him; by going to Cercy this morning with Sir
Ralph. We found his mother there, who seems a delightful woman; and the
house is furnished with refinement and comfort, but without ostentation
and without a trace of the pride that attaches to venerable names. After
all, this Ramière's a good fellow, and I have invited him to come and
breakfast with us and inspect the factory. I hear favorable accounts of
his brother, and I have made sure that he cannot injure me by adopting
the same methods that I use; so I prefer that that family should profit
by them rather than any other. You see no secrets are kept very long,
and mine will soon be like a stage secret if progress in manufacturing
continues at the present rate."

"For my part," said Sir Ralph, "I have always disapproved of this
secrecy, as you know; a good citizen's discovery belongs to his country
as much as to himself, and if I----"

"_Parbleu!_ that is just like you, Sir Ralph, with your practical
philanthropy! You will make me think that your fortune doesn't belong to
you, and that, if the nation takes a fancy to it to-morrow, you are
ready to exchange your fifty thousand francs a year for a wallet and
staff! It looks well for a buck like you, who are as fond of the
comforts of life as a sultan, to preach contempt of wealth!"

"What I say," rejoined Sir Ralph, "is not meant to be philanthropic at
all; my point is that selfishness properly understood leads us to do
good to others to prevent them injuring us. I am selfish myself, as
everybody knows. I have accustomed myself not to blush for it, and,
after analyzing all the virtues, I find personal interest at the
foundation of them all. Love and devotion, which are two apparently
generous passions, are perhaps the most selfish passions that exist; nor
is patriotism less so, my word for it. I care little for men; but not
for anything in the world would I undertake to prove it to them, my fear
of them is inversely proportional to my esteem for them. We are both
selfish therefore but I admit it, whereas you deny it."

A discussion arose between them wherein each sought by all the arguments
of selfishness to demonstrate the selfishness of the others. Madame
Delmare took advantage of it to retire to her room and to abandon
herself to all the reflections to which news so entirely unexpected
naturally gave birth.

It will be well not only to admit you to the secret of her thoughts, but
also to enlighten you as to the situation of the various persons whom
Noun's death had affected in greater or less degree.

It is almost proven, so far as the reader and I myself are concerned,
that that unfortunate creature threw herself into the stream through
despair, in one of those moments of frenzy when extreme resolutions are
most easily formed. But, as she evidently did not return to the house
after leaving Raymon--as no one had met her and had an opportunity to
divine her purpose--there was no indication of suicide to throw light
upon the mystery of her death.

Two persons were in a position to attribute it with moral certainty to
her own act--Monsieur de Ramière and the gardener of Lagny. The grief
of the former was concealed beneath a pretence of illness; the terror
and remorse of the other enjoined silence upon him. This man who, from
cupidity, had connived at the intercourse of the lovers throughout the
winter, was the only person who had been in a position to remark the
young creole's secret misery. Justly fearing the reproaches of his
employers and the criticisms of his equals, he held his peace in his own
interest; and when Monsieur Delmare, who had some suspicions after the
discovery of this intrigue, questioned him as to the lengths to which it
had been carried during his absence, he boldly denied that it had
continued at all. Some people in the neighborhood--a very lonely
neighborhood, by the way--had noticed Noun walking toward Crecy at
unreasonable hours; but apparently there had been no relations between
her and Monsieur de Ramière since the end of January, and her death
occurred on the 28th of March. So far as appeared, her death was
attributable to chance; as she was walking through the park at
nightfall, she might have been deceived by the dense fog that had
prevailed for several days, have lost her way and missed the English
bridge over the stream, which was quite narrow but had very steep banks
and was swollen by recent rains.

Although Sir Ralph, who was more observant than his reflections
indicated, had found in his private thoughts grounds for strong
suspicion of Monsieur de Ramière, he communicated them to no one,
regarding as useless and cruel any reproachful words addressed to a man
who was so unfortunate as to have such a source of remorse in his life.
He even succeeded in convincing the colonel, who expressed in his
presence some suspicions in that regard, that it was most urgent, in
Madame Delmare's delicate condition, to continue to conceal from her the
possible causes of her old playmate's suicide. So it was with the poor
girl's death as with her love affair. There was a tacit agreement never
to mention it before Indiana, and ere long it ceased to be talked about
at all.

But these precautions were of no avail, for Madame Delmare had her own
reasons for suspecting a part of the truth; the bitter reproaches she
had heaped on the unhappy girl on that fatal evening seemed to her a
sufficient explanation of her sudden resolution. So it was that, at the
ghastly moment when she discovered the dead body floating in the water,
Indiana's repose, already so disturbed, and her heart, already so sad,
had received the final blow; her lingering disease was progressing
actively; and this woman, young and perhaps strong, refusing to be
cured, concealing her sufferings from her husband's undiscerning and far
from delicate affection, sank voluntarily beneath the burden of sorrow
and discouragement.

"Woe is me!" she cried as she entered her room, after learning of
Raymon's impending visit. "A curse on that man, who has entered this
house only to bring despair and death! O God! why dost Thou permit him
to come between Thee and me, to take command of my destiny at his
pleasure, so that he has only to put out his hand and say: 'She is mine!
I will derange her reason, I will bring desolation into her life; and if
she resists me I will spread mourning around her, I will encompass her
with remorse, regrets and alarms!' O God! it is not fair that a poor
woman should be so persecuted!"

She wept bitterly; for the thought of Raymon revived the memory of Noun,
more vivid and heartrending than ever.

"Poor Noun! my poor playmate! my countrywoman, my only friend!" she
exclaimed sorrowfully; "that man is your murderer. Unhappy child! his
influence was fatal to you as to me! You loved me so dearly, you were
the only one who could divine my sorrows and mitigate them by your
artless gayety! Woe to me who have lost you! Was it for this that I
brought you from so far away! By what wiles did that man surprise your
good faith and induce you to do such a despicable thing? Ah! he must
have deceived you shamefully, and you did not realize your error until
you saw my indignation! I was too harsh, Noun, I was so harsh that I was
downright cruel; I drove you to despair, I killed you! Poor girl! why
did you not wait a few hours until the wind had blown away my resentment
like a wisp of straw! Why did you not come and weep on my bosom and say:
'I was deceived; I acted without knowing what I was doing, but you know
well enough that I respect you and love you!'--I would have taken you in
my arms, we would have wept together, and you would not be dead. Dead!
dead so young and so lovely and so full of life! Dead at nineteen and
such a ghastly death!"

While thus weeping for her companion, Indiana, unknown to herself, wept
also for her three days of illusion, the loveliest days of her life, the
only days when she had really lived; for during those three days she had
loved with a passion which Raymon, had he been the most presumptuous of
men, could never have imagined. But the blinder and more violent that
love had been, the more keenly had she felt the insult she had received;
the first love of a heart like hers contains so much modesty and
sensitive delicacy!

And yet Indiana had yielded to a burst of shame and anger rather than to
a well-matured determination. I have no doubt that Raymon would have
obtained his pardon had he been allowed a few more minutes in which to
plead for it. But fate had defeated his love and his address, and Madame
Delmare honestly believed now that she hated him.