Raymon was not prepared for that silent salon, peopled only by a few
taciturn guests. It was impossible to utter a word which was not heard
in every corner of the room. The dowagers who were playing cards seemed
to be there for the sole purpose of embarrassing the conversation of the
younger guests, and Raymon fancied that he could read on their stern
features the secret satisfaction which old age takes in avenging itself
by blocking other people's pleasure. He had counted upon a less
constrained, tenderer interview than that of the ball, and it was just
the opposite. This unexpected difficulty gave greater intensity to his
desires, more fire to his glances, more animation and vivacity to the
roundabout remarks he addressed to Madame Delmare. The poor child was
altogether unused to this style of attack. She could not possibly defend
herself, because nothing was asked of her; but she was forced to listen
to the proffer of an ardent heart, to learn how dearly she was loved,
and to allow herself to be encompassed by all the perils of seduction
without making any resistance. Her embarrassment increased with Raymon's
boldness. Madame de Carvajal, who made some reasonably well-founded
claims to wit, and to whom Monsieur de Ramière's wit had been highly
praised, left the card-table to challenge him to a refined discussion
concerning love, into which she introduced much Spanish heat and German
metaphysics. Raymon eagerly accepted the challenge, and, on the pretext
of answering the aunt, said to the niece all that she would have refused
to hear. The poor young wife, without a protector and exposed to so
lively and skilful an assault on all sides, could not muster strength to
take part in that thorny discussion. In vain did her aunt, who was
anxious to exhibit her to advantage, call upon her to testify to the
truth of certain subtle theories of sentiment; she confessed blushingly
that she knew nothing about such things, and Raymon, intoxicated with
joy to see her cheeks flush and her bosom heave, swore inwardly that he
would teach her.

Indiana slept less that night than she had done for the last two or
three nights; as we have said, she had never been in love, and her heart
had long been ripe for a sentiment which none of the men she had met
hitherto had succeeded in arousing. She had been brought up by a father
of an eccentric and violent character, and had never known the happiness
which is derived from the affection of another person. Monsieur de
Carvajal, drunk with political passions, consumed by ambitious regrets,
had become the most cruel planter and the most disagreeable neighbor in
the colonies; his daughter had suffered keenly from his detestable
humor. But, by dint of watching the constant tableau of the evils of
slavery, of enduring the weariness of solitude and dependence, she had
acquired a superficial patience, proof against every trial, an adorable
kindliness toward her inferiors, but also an iron will and an
incalculable power of resistance to everything that tended to oppress
her. By marrying Delmare she simply changed masters; by coming to live
at Lagny, she changed her prison and the locus of her solitude. She did
not love her husband, perhaps for the very reason that she was told that
it was her duty to love him, and that it had become with her a sort of
second nature, a principle of conduct, a law of conscience, to resist
mentally every sort of moral constraint. No one had attempted to point
out to her any other law than that of blind obedience.

Brought up in the desert, neglected by her father, surrounded by slaves,
to whom she could offer no other assistance or encouragement than her
compassion and her tears, she had accustomed herself to say: "A day will
come when everything in my life will be changed, when I shall do good to
others, when some one will love me, when I shall give my whole heart to
the man who gives me his; meanwhile, I will suffer in silence and keep
my love as a reward for him who shall set me free." This liberator, this
Messiah had not come; Indiana was still awaiting him. She no longer
dared, it is true, to confess to herself her whole thought. She had
realized under the clipped hedge-rows of Lagny that thought itself was
more fettered there than under the wild palms of Ile Bourbon; and when
she caught herself saying, as she used to say: "A day will come--a man
will come"--she forced that rash longing back to the depths of her
heart, and said to herself: "Death alone will bring that day!"

And so she was dying. A strange malady was consuming her youth. She was
without strength and unable to sleep. The doctors looked in vain for any
discoverable disorder, for none existed; all her faculties were failing
away in equal degree, all her organs were gradually degenerating; her
heart was burning at a slow fire, her eyes were losing their lustre, the
circulation of her blood was governed entirely by excitement and fever;
a few months more and the poor captive bird would surely die. But,
whatever the extent of her resignation and her discouragement, the need
remained the same. That silent, broken heart was still calling
involuntarily to some generous youthful heart to revivify it. The being
whom she had loved most dearly hitherto was Noun, the cheery and brave
companion of her tedious solitude; and the man who had manifested the
greatest liking for her was her phlegmatic cousin Sir Ralph. What food
for the all-consuming activity of her thoughts--a poor girl, ignorant
and neglected like herself, and an Englishman whose only passion was
fox-hunting!

Madame Delmare was genuinely unhappy, and the first time that she felt
the burning breath of a young and passionate man enter her frigid
atmosphere, the first time that a tender and caressing word delighted
her ear, and quivering lips left a mark as of a red-hot iron on her
hand, she thought neither of the duties that had been laid upon her, nor
of the prudence that had been enjoined upon her, nor of the future that
had been predicted for her; she remembered only the hateful past, her
long suffering, her despotic masters. Nor did it occur to her that the
man before her might be false or fickle. She saw him as she wished him
to be, as she had dreamed of him, and Raymon could easily have deceived
her if he had not been sincere.

But how could he fail to be sincere with so lovely and loving a woman?
What other had ever laid bare her heart to him with such candor and
ingenuousness? With what other had he been able to look forward to a
future so captivating and so secure? Was she not born to love him, this
slave who simply awaited a sign to break her chains, a word to follow
him? Evidently heaven had made for Raymon this melancholy child of Ile
Bourbon, whom no one had ever loved, and who but for him must have died.

Nevertheless a feeling of terror succeeded this all-pervading, feverish
joy in Madame Delmare's heart. She thought of her quick-tempered,
keen-eyed, vindictive husband, and she was afraid,--not for herself, for
she was inured to threats, but for the man who was about to undertake a
battle to the death with her tyrant. She knew so little of society that
she transformed her life into a tragic romance; a timid creature, who
dared not love for fear of endangering her lover's life, she gave no
thought to the danger of destroying herself.

This then was the secret of her resistance, the motive of her virtue.
She made up her mind on the following day to avoid Monsieur de Ramière.
That very evening there was a ball at the house of one of the leading
bankers of Paris. Madame de Carvajal, who, being an old woman with no
ties of affection, was very fond of society, proposed to attend with
Indiana; but Raymon was to be there and Indiana determined not to go. To
avoid her aunt's persecution, Madame Delmare, who was never able to
resist except in action, pretended to assent to the plan; she allowed
herself to be dressed and waited until Madame de Carvajal was ready;
then she changed her ball dress for a robe de chambre, seated herself in
front of the fire and resolutely awaited the conflict. When the old
Spaniard, as rigid and gorgeous as a portrait by Van Dyck, came to call
her, Indiana declared that she was not well and did not feel that she
could go out. In vain did her aunt urge her to make an effort.

"I would be only too glad to go," she said, "but you see that I can
hardly stand. I should be only a trouble to you to-night. Go to the ball
without me, dear aunt; I shall enjoy the thought of your pleasure."

"Go without you!" said Madame de Carvajal, who was sorely distressed at
the idea of having made an elaborate toilet to no purpose, and who
shrank from the horrors of a solitary evening. "Why, what business have
I in society, an old woman whom no one speaks to except to be near you?
What will become of me without my niece's lovely eyes to give me value?"

"Your wit will fill the gap, my dear aunt," said Indiana.

The Marquise de Carvajal, who only wanted to be urged, set off at last.
Whereupon, Indiana hid her face in her hands and began to weep; for she
had made a great sacrifice and believed that she had already blasted the
attractive prospect of the day before.

But Raymon would not have it so. The first thing that he saw at the ball
was the old marchioness's haughty aigrette. In vain did he look for
Indiana's white dress and black hair in her vicinity. He drew near and
heard her say in an undertone to another lady:

"My niece is ill; or rather," she added, to justify her own presence at
the ball, "it's a mere girlish whim. She wanted to be left alone in the
salon with a book in her hand, like a sentimental beauty."

"Can it be that she is avoiding me?" thought Raymon. He left the ball at
once. He hurried to the marchioness's house, entered without speaking to
the concierge, and asked the first servant that he saw, who was half
asleep in the antechamber, for Madame Delmare.

"Madame Delmare is ill."

"I know it. I have come at Madame de Carvajal's request to see how she
is."

"I will tell madame."

"It is not necessary. Madame Delmare will receive me."

And Raymon entered the salon unannounced. All the other servants had
retired. A melancholy silence reigned in the deserted apartments. A
single lamp, covered with its green silk shade, lighted the main salon
dimly. Indiana's back was turned to the door; she was completely hidden
in the depths of a huge easy-chair, sadly watching the burning logs, as
on the evening when Raymon entered the park of Lagny over the wall;
sadder now, for her former undefined sufferings, aimless desires had
given place to a fleeting joy, a gleam of happiness that was not for
her.

Raymon, his feet encased in dancing shoes, approached noiselessly over
the soft, heavy carpet. He saw that she was weeping, and, when she
turned her head, she found him at her feet, taking forcible possession
of her hands, which she struggled in vain to withdraw from his clasp.
Then, I agree, she was overjoyed beyond words to find that her scheme of
resistance had failed. She felt that she passionately loved this man who
paid no heed to obstacles and who had brought happiness to her in spite
of her efforts. She blessed heaven for rejecting her sacrifice, and,
instead of scolding Raymon, she was very near thanking him.

As for him, he knew already that she loved him. He needed not to see the
joy that shone through her tears to realize that he was master, and that
he could venture. He gave her no time to question him, but, changing
rôles with her, vouchsafing no explanation of his unlooked-for
presence, and no apology intended to make him seem less guilty than he
was, he said:

"You are weeping, Indiana. Why do you weep? I insist upon knowing."

She started when he called her by her name; but there was additional joy
in the surprise which that audacity caused her.

"Why do you ask?" she said. "I must not tell you."

"Well, I know, Indiana. I know your whole history, your whole life.
Nothing that concerns you is unknown to me, because nothing that
concerns you is indifferent to me. I resolved to know everything about
you, and I have learned nothing that was not revealed to me during the
brief moment that I passed under your roof, when I was brought, all
crushed and bleeding, to your feet, and your husband was angry to see
you, so lovely and so kind, support me with your soft arms and pour balm
upon my wounds with your sweet breath. He was jealous? oh! I can readily
understand it; I should have been, in his place, Indiana; or rather, in
his place, I would kill myself; for to be your husband, madame, to
possess you, to hold you in his arms, and not to deserve you, not to win
your heart, is to be the most miserable or the most dastardly of men!"

"O heaven! hush," she cried, putting her hand over his mouth; "hush! for
you make me guilty. Why do you speak to me of him? why seek to teach me
to curse him? If he should hear you! But I have said no evil of him; I
have not authorized you to commit this crime! I do not hate him; I
esteem him, I love him!"

"Say rather that you are horribly afraid of him; for the despot has
broken your spirit, and fear has sat at your bedside ever since you
became that man's prey. You, Indiana, profaned by the touch of that
boor, whose iron hand has bowed your head and ruined your life! Poor
child! so young and so lovely, to have suffered so horribly! for you
cannot deceive me, Indiana, who look at you with other eyes than those
of the common herd; I know all the secrets of your destiny, and you
cannot hope to hide the truth from me. Let those who look at you because
you are lovely say, when they notice your pallor and your melancholy:
'She is ill;'--well and good; but I, who follow you with my heart, whose
whole soul encompasses you with solicitude and love, I am well aware
what your disease is. I know that, if God had willed it so, if he had
given you to me, unlucky wretch that I am, who deserve to have my head
broken for having come so late, you would not be ill. On my life I
swear, Indiana, I would have loved you so that you would have loved me
the same and that you would have blessed the chain that bound us. I
would have carried you in my arms to prevent your feet from being
wounded; I would have warmed them with my breath. I would have held you
against my breast to save you from suffering. I would have given all my
blood to make up your lack of it, and if you had lost sleep with me, I
would have passed the night saying soft words to you, smiling on you to
restore your courage, weeping the while to see you suffer. When sleep
had breathed upon your silken eyelids, I would have brushed them with my
lips to close them more softly, and I would have watched over you,
kneeling by your bed. I would have forced the air to caress you gently,
golden dreams to throw flowers to you. I would have kissed noiselessly
your lovely tresses, I would have counted with ecstatic joy the
palpitations of your breast, and, at your awakening, Indiana, you would
have found me at your feet, guarding you like a jealous master, waiting
upon you as a slave, watching for your first smile, seizing upon your
first thought, your first glance, your first kiss."

"Enough! enough!" said Indiana, agitated and quivering with emotion,
"you make me faint."

And yet, if people died of happiness, Indiana would have died at that
moment.

"Do not speak so to me," she said--"to me who am destined never to be
happy; do not depict heaven upon earth to me who am doomed to die."

"To die!" cried Raymon vehemently, seizing her in his arms; "you, die!
Indiana! die before you have lived--before you have loved! No, you shall
not die; I will not let you die, for my life is bound to yours
henceforth. You are the woman of whom I dreamed, the purity that I
adored, the chimera that always fled from me, the bright star that shone
before me and said to me: 'Go forward in this life of wretchedness and
heaven will send one of its angels to bear you company.' You were always
destined for me; your soul was always betrothed to mine, Indiana! Men
and their iron laws have disposed of you; they have snatched from me the
mate God would have chosen for me, if God did not sometimes forget his
promises. But what do we care for men and laws if I love you still in
another's arms, if you can still love me, accursed and unhappy as I am
in having lost you! I tell you, Indiana, you belong to me; you are the
half of my heart, which has long been struggling to join the other half.
When you dreamed of a friend on Ile Bourbon, you dreamed of me; when, at
the word husband, a sweet thrill of fear and hope passed through your
heart, it was because I was destined to be your husband. Do you not
recognize me? Does not it seem to you that we must have met twenty years
ago? Did I not recognize you, my angel, when you stanched my blood with
your veil, when you placed your hand on my dying heart to bring back its
heat and its life? Ah! I remember distinctly enough. When I opened my
eyes I said to myself: 'There she is! she has been like that in all my
dreams--pale, melancholy and kind-hearted. She is my own; it is she who
is destined to fill my cup with unknown joys.' And the physical life
which returned to me then was your work. For we were brought together by
no commonplace circumstances, you see; it was neither chance nor
caprice, but fatality, death, which opened the gates of this new life to
me. It was your husband--your master--who, guided by his destiny,
brought me all bleeding in his arms and threw me at your feet, saying:
'Here is something for you!' And now nothing can part us."

"Yes, he can part us!" hastily interposed Madame Delmare, who, carried
away by her lover's transports, had listened to him in ecstasy. "Alas!
alas! you do not know him; he is a man who knows nothing of pardon--a
man who cannot be deceived. He will kill you, Raymon!"

She hid her face in his bosom, sobbing. Raymon embraced her
passionately.

"Let him come!" he cried; "let him come and snatch this moment of
happiness from me! I defy him! Stay here, Indiana--here against my
heart; let it be your refuge and your protection. Love me and I shall be
invulnerable. You know that it is not in that man's power to kill me; I
have already been exposed defenceless to his blows. But you, my good
angel, were hovering over me, and your wings protected me. Have no fear,
I say, we shall find a way to turn aside his wrath; and now I am not
even afraid for you, for I shall be at hand. And when this master of
yours attempts to oppress you, I will protect you against him. I will
rescue you, if necessary, from his cruel laws. Would you like me to kill
him? Tell me that you love me, and I will be his executioner if you
sentence him to death."

"Hush! hush! you make me shudder! If you wish to kill some one, kill me;
for I have lived one whole day and I ask nothing more."

"Die, then, but let it be of happiness!" cried Raymon, pressing his lips
to Indiana's.

But the storm was too severe for so fragile a plant; she turned pale,
put her hand to her heart and swooned.

At first Raymon thought that his caresses would call her blood back into
her icy veins; but in vain did he cover her hand with kisses; in vain
did he call her by the sweetest names. It was not a premeditated swoon
of the sort we so often see. Madame Delmare had been seriously ill for a
long time, and was subject to nervous paroxysms which sometimes lasted
whole hours. Raymon, in desperation, was reduced to the necessity of
calling for help. He rang; a maid appeared; but the phial that she held
escaped from her hands, and a cry from her throat, when she recognized
Raymon. He, recovering instantly all his self-possession, put his mouth
to her ear.

"Hush, Noun! I knew that you were here and I came to see you. I did not
expect to see your mistress, who was, as I supposed, at the ball. When I
came in I frightened her and she fainted. Be prudent; I am going away."

Raymon fled, leaving each of the two women in possession of a secret
which was destined to carry despair to the heart of the other.