For his part, it was neither in a spirit of bravado nor because of the
injury to his self-esteem that he aspired more ardently than ever to
Madame Delmare's love and forgiveness. He believed that they were
unattainable, and no other woman's love, no other earthly joy seemed to
him their equivalent. Such was his nature. An insatiable craving for
action and excitement consumed his life. He loved society with its laws
and its fetters, because it offered him material for combat and
resistance; and if he had a horror of license and debauchery, it was
because they promised insipid and easily obtained pleasure.

Do not believe, however, that he was insensible to Noun's ruin. In the
first impulse, he conceived a horror of himself and loaded his pistols
with a very real purpose of blowing out his brains; but a praiseworthy
feeling stayed his hand. What would become of his mother, his aged,
feeble mother, the poor woman whose life had been so agitated and so
sorrowful, who lived only for him, her only treasure, her only hope?
Must he break her heart, shorten the few years that still remained to
her? No, surely not. The best way to redeem his wrongdoing was to devote
himself thenceforth solely to his mother, and it was with that purpose
in mind that he returned to her at Paris, and put forth all his energies
to make her forget his desertion of her during a large part of the
winter.

Raymon exerted an incredible influence over everybody about him; for,
take him for all in all, with his faults and his youthful escapades, he
was above the average of society men. We have not as yet told you upon
what his reputation for wit and talent was based, because it was aside
from the events we had to describe; but it is time to inform you that
this Raymon, whose weaknesses you have followed and whose frivolity you
have censured, is one of the men who have had the most control and
influence over your thoughts, whatever your opinions to-day may be. You
have devoured his political pamphlets, and, while reading the newspapers
of the period, you have often been captivated by the irresistible charm
of his style and the grace of his courteous and worldly logic.

I am speaking of a time already far away, in these days when time is no
longer reckoned by centuries, nor even by reigns, but by ministries. I
am speaking of the Martignac year, of that epoch of repose and doubt,
interjected in the middle of a political era, not like a treaty of
peace, but like an armistice; of those fifteen months of the reign of
doctrines, which had such a strange influence on principles and on
morals, and which may perhaps have paved the way for the extraordinary
result of our latest revolution.

It was in those days that men saw the blooming of certain youthful
talents, unfortunate in that they were born in a period of transition
and of compromise; for they paid their tribute to the conciliatory and
wavering tendencies of the time. Never, so far as I know, was knowledge
of mere words and ignorance, or pretended ignorance, of things carried
so far. It was the reign of restrictions, and it is beyond my power to
say who made the fullest use of them, short-gowned Jesuits or
long-gowned lawyers. Political moderation had become a part of the
national character, like courteous manners, and it was the same with the
first variety of courtesy as with the second: it served as a mask for
secret antipathies, and taught them how to fight without scandal and
publicity. We must say, however, in defence of the young men of that
period, that they were often towed like light skiffs in the wake of
great ships, with no very clear idea of where they were being taken,
proud and happy to be cleaving the waves and swelling out their new
sails.

Placed by his birth and his wealth among the partisans of absolute
royalty, Raymon made a sacrifice to the _youthful_ ideas of his time by
clinging religiously to the Charter; at all events that was what he
thought that he was doing and what he exerted himself to prove. But
conventions that have fallen into desuetude are subject to
interpretation, and the Charter of Louis XVIII was already in the same
plight as the Gospel of Jesus Christ; it was simply a text upon which
everybody practised his powers of eloquence, and a speech thereon
created a precedent no more than a sermon. A period of luxurious living
and indolence, when civilization lay sleeping on the brink of a
bottomless abyss, eager to enjoy its last pleasures.

Raymon had taken his stand upon the line between abuse of power and
abuse of licence, a shifting ground upon which good men still sought,
but in vain, a shelter from the tempest that was brewing. To him, as to
many other experienced minds, the rôle of conscientious statesman still
seemed possible. A manifest error at a time when people pretended to
defer to the voice of reason only to stifle it the more surely on every
side. Being without political passions, Raymon fancied that he was
without interests to promote; but he was mistaken, for society,
constituted as it then was, was agreeable and advantageous to him; it
could not be disturbed without a diminution in the sum total of his
well-being, and that perfect contentment with one's social position,
which communicates itself to the thought, is a wonderful promoter of
moderation. Who is so ungrateful to Providence as to reproach it for the
misfortunes of other people, if it has only smiles and benefactions for
him? How was it possible to persuade those young supporters of the
constitutional monarchy that the constitution was already antiquated,
that it weighed heavily on the social body and fatigued it, while they
found its burdens light and reaped only its advantages?

Nothing is so easy and so common as to deceive one's self when one does
not lack wit and is familiar with all the niceties of the language.
Language is a prostitute queen who descends and rises to all rôles,
disguises herself, arrays herself in fine apparel, hides her head and
effaces herself; an advocate who has an answer for everything, who has
always foreseen everything, and who assumes a thousand forms in order to
be right. The most honorable of men is he who thinks best and acts best,
but the most powerful is he who is best able to talk and write.

As his wealth relieved him from the necessity of writing for money,
Raymon wrote from a liking for it, and--he said it with perfect good
faith--from a sense of duty. The rare faculty that he possessed, of
refuting positive truth by sheer talent, had made him an invaluable man
to the ministry, whom he served much better by his impartial criticism
than did its creatures by their blind devotion; and even more invaluable
to that fashionable young society which was quite willing to abjure the
absurdities of its former privileges, but wished at the same time to
retain the benefit of its present advantageous position.

They were in very truth men of great talent who still supported society,
tottering on the brink of the precipice, and who, being themselves
suspended between two reefs, struggled calmly and with perfect
self-possession against the harsh reality that was on the point of
engulfing them. To succeed in such wise as to create a conviction
against every sort of probability and to keep that conviction alive for
some time among men of no convictions, is the art which most impresses
and surpasses the understanding of an uncultivated, vulgar mind which
has studied none but commonplace truths.

Thus Raymon had no sooner returned to that society, which was his
element and his home, than he felt its vital and exciting influences.
The petty love affairs that had engrossed him vanished for a moment in
the face of broader and more brilliant interests. He carried into these
the same boldness of attack, the same ardor; and when he saw that he was
more eagerly sought than ever by all the most distinguished people in
Paris, he felt that he loved life more than ever. Was he to be blamed
for forgetting a secret remorse while reaping the reward he had merited
for services rendered his country? He felt life overflowing through
every pore of his young heart, his active brain, his whole vigorous and
buoyant being, he felt that destiny was making him happy in spite of
himself; and he would crave forgiveness of an indignant ghost that came
sometimes and bewailed her fate in his dreams, for having sought in the
affection of the living a protection against the terrors of the grave.

But he had no sooner returned to life, as it were, than he felt, as in
the past, the need of mingling thoughts of love and plans of intrigue
with his political meditations, his dreams of ambition and philosophy. I
say ambition, not meaning ambition for honor and wealth, for which he
had no use, but for reputation and aristocratic popularity.

He had at first despaired of ever seeing Madame Delmare again after the
tragic ending of his double intrigue. But, as he measured the extent of
his loss, as he brooded over the thought of the treasure that had
escaped him, he conceived the hope of grasping it once more, and, at the
same time he regained determination and confidence. He calculated the
obstacles he should encounter, and realized that the most difficult to
overcome at the outset would come from Indiana herself; therefore he
must use the husband to protect him from the attack. This was not a new
idea, but it was sure; jealous husbands are particularly well adapted to
this service.

A fortnight after he had conceived this idea, Raymon was on the way to
Lagny, where he was expected to breakfast. You will not require me to
describe to you in detail the shrewdly proffered services by which he
had succeeded in making himself agreeable to Monsieur Delmare; I prefer,
as I am describing the features of the characters in this tale, to draw
a hasty sketch of the colonel for you.

Do you know what they call an _honest_ man in the provinces? He is a man
who does not encroach on his neighbor's field; who does not demand from
his debtors a sou more than they owe him; who raises his hat to every
person who bows to him; who does not ravish maidens in the public roads;
who sets fire to no other man's barn; who does not rob wayfarers at the
corner of his park. Provided that he religiously respects the lives and
purses of his fellow-citizens, nothing more is demanded of him. He may
beat his wife, maltreat his servants, ruin his children, and it is
nobody's business. Society punishes only those acts which are injurious
to it; private life is beyond its jurisdiction.

Such was Monsieur Delmare's theory of morals. He had never studied any
other social contract than this: _Every man is master in his own house._
He treated all affairs of the heart as feminine puerilities, sentimental
subtleties. Being a man devoid of wit, of tact and of education, he
enjoyed greater consideration than a man obtains by dint of talent and
amiability. He had broad shoulders and a strong wrist; he handled the
sword and the sabre perfectly, and was exceedingly quick to take
offence. As he did not always understand a joke, he was constantly
haunted by the idea that people were making fun of him. Being incapable
of suitable repartee, he had but one way of defending himself: to
enforce silence by threats. His favorite epigrams always turned upon
cowhidings to be administered and affairs of honor to be settled;
wherefore the province always prefixed to his name the epithet _brave_
because military valor apparently consists in having broad shoulders and
long moustaches, in swearing fiercely, and in putting one's hand to the
sword on the slightest pretext.

God forbid that I should believe that camp life makes all men brutes!
but I may be permitted to believe that one must have a large stock of
tact and discretion to resist the habit of passive and brutal
domination. If you have served in the army, you are familiar with what
the troops call _skin-breeches_, and will agree that there are large
numbers of them among the remains of the old imperial cohorts. Those men
who, when brought together and urged forward by a powerful hand,
performed such magnificent exploits, towered like giants amid the smoke
of the battle-field; but, having returned to civil life, the heroes
became mere soldiers once more, bold, vulgar fellows who reasoned like
machines; and it was fortunate if they did not behave in society as in
conquered territory. It was the fault of the age rather than theirs.
Ingenuous minds, they had faith in the adulation of victory, and allowed
themselves to be persuaded that they were great patriots because they
defended their country--some against their will, others for money and
honors. But how did they defend it, those tens of thousands of men who
blindly embraced the error of a single man, and who, after saving their
country, basely destroyed it? And again, if a soldier's devotion to his
captain seems to you a great and noble thing, well and good, so it does
to me; but I call that fidelity, not patriotism. I congratulate the
conquerors of Spain, I do not thank them. As for the honor of the French
name, I by no means understand that method of safeguarding it among
neighbors, and I find it difficult to believe that the Emperor's
generals were very deeply engrossed by it at that deplorable stage of
our glory; but I know that we are forbidden to discuss these matters
impartially; I hold my peace, posterity will pass judgment on them.

Monsieur Delmare had all the good qualities and all the failings of
these men. He was innocent to childishness concerning certain
refinements of the point of honor, yet he was very well able to conduct
his affairs to the best possible end without disturbing himself as to
the good or evil which might result therefrom to others. His whole
conscience was the law; his whole moral code was his rights under the
law. His was one of those rigid, unbending probities which never borrow
for fear of not returning, and never lend for fear of not recovering. He
was the honest man who neither takes nor gives aught; who would rather
die than steal a bundle of sticks in the king's forest, but would kill
you without ceremony for picking up a twig in his. He was useful to
himself alone, harmful to nobody. He took part in nothing that was going
on about him, lest he might be compelled to do somebody a favor. But,
when he deemed himself in honor bound to do it, no one could go about it
with more energy and zeal and a more chivalrous spirit. At once trustful
as a child and suspicious as a despot, he would believe a false oath and
distrust a sincere promise. As in the military profession, form was
everything with him. Public opinion governed him so exclusively that
common sense and argument counted for nothing in his decisions, and when
he said: "Such things are done," he thought that he had stated an
irrefutable argument.

Thus it will be seen that his nature was most antipathetic to his
wife's, his heart entirely unfitted to understand her, his mind entirely
incapable of appreciating her. And yet it is certain that slavery had
engendered in her woman's heart a sort of virtuous and unspoken aversion
which was not always just. Madame Delmare doubted her husband's heart
overmuch; he was only harsh and she deemed him cruel. There was more
roughness than anger in his outbreaks, more vulgarity than impertinence
in his manners. Nature had not made him evil-minded: he had moments of
compassion which led him to repentance, and in his repentance he was
almost sensitive. It was camp life that had raised brutality to a
principle in him. With a less refined, less gentle wife he would have
been as gentle as a tame wolf; but this woman was disheartened with her
fate; she did not take the trouble to try to make it happier.