You will find it difficult to believe perhaps that Monsieur de Ramière,
a young man of brilliant intellect, considerable talents and many
estimable qualities, accustomed to salon triumphs and to adventures in
perfumed boudoirs, had conceived a very durable passion for the
housekeeper in the household of a small manufacturer in Brie. And yet
Monsieur de Ramière was neither fop nor libertine. We have said that he
was intelligent--that is to say, he appreciated the advantages of birth
at their real value. He was a man of high principle when he argued with
himself; but vehement passions often carried him beyond the bounds of
his theories. At such times he was incapable of reflection, or he
avoided appearing before the tribunal of his conscience: he went astray,
as if without his own knowledge, and the man of yesterday strove to
deceive him of to-morrow. Unfortunately the most salient feature in his
character was not his principles, which he possessed in common with many
other white-gloved philosophers and which no more preserved him from
inconsistency than they preserve them; but his passions, which no
principles could stifle, and which made of him a man apart in that
degenerate society where it is so difficult to depart from the beaten
path without appearing ridiculous. Raymon had the art of being often
culpable without arousing hatred, often eccentric without being
offensive; indeed he sometimes succeeded in arousing the pity of people
who had the most reason to complain of him. There are men who are
humored thus by every one who approaches them. Sometimes an attractive
face and animated speech make up the sum total of their sensibility. We
do not presume to judge Monsieur Raymon de Ramière so harshly, nor to
draw his portrait before exhibiting him in action. We are examining him
now at a distance, like the multitude who pass him in the street.

Monsieur de Ramière was in love with the young creole with the great
black eyes, who had aroused the admiration of the whole province at the
fête of Rubelles; but he was in love and nothing more. He had made her
acquaintance because he had nothing else to do, perhaps, and success had
kindled his desires; he had obtained more than he asked, and on the day
that he triumphed over that easily vanquished heart he returned home
dismayed by his victory, and said to himself, striking his forehead:

"God grant that she doesn't love me!"

Thus it was not until after he had accepted all the proofs of her love
that he began to suspect the existence of that love. Then he repented,
but it was too late; he must either resign himself to what the future
might have in store, or retreat like a coward toward the past. Raymon
did not hesitate; he allowed himself to be loved, he loved in return for
gratitude; he scaled the walls of the Delmare estate from love of
danger; he had a terrible fall from awkwardness; and he was so touched
by his lovely young mistress's grief that he deemed himself justified
thenceforth in his own eyes in continuing to dig the pit into which she
was destined to fall.

When he had recovered, winter had no storms, darkness no perils, remorse
no stings which could deter him from passing through the corner of the
forest to meet the young creole and swear to her that he had never loved
any other woman; that he preferred her to the queens of society, and a
thousand other exaggerations which will always be fashionable with poor
and credulous maidens. In January Madame Delmare went to Paris with her
husband; Sir Ralph Brown, their excellent neighbor, betook himself to
his own estate, and Noun, being left in charge of her master's country
house, was able to absent herself on various pretexts. It was
unfortunate for her, and this facility of intercourse with her lover
greatly abridged the ephemeral happiness which she was destined to
enjoy. The forest with its poetic shadows, its arabesques of hoar-frost,
its moonlight effects, the mysterious going and coming by the little
gate, the furtive departure in the morning when Noun's little feet, as
she accompanied him to the gate, left their prints on the snow in the
park--all these accessories of an amorous intrigue served to prolong
Monsieur de Ramière's intoxication. Noun, in white _déshablilé_, with
her long black hair for ornament, was a lady, a queen, a fairy; when he
saw her come forth from that red brick castle, a heavy, square structure
of the time of the Regency, with a semi-feudal aspect, he could easily
fancy her a châtelaine of the Middle Ages, and in the summerhouse
filled with rare flowers, where she made him drunk with the seductions
of youth and passion, he readily forgot all that he was destined to
remember later.

But when Noun, disdaining precautions and defying danger in her turn,
came to him at his home, with her white apron and neckerchief
coquettishly arranged according to the fashion of her country, she was
nothing more than a maid and a maid in the service of a pretty woman--a
circumstance that always makes a soubrette seem like a makeshift. And
yet Noun was very lovely, it was in that dress that he had first seen
her at that village fête where he had forced his way through the crowd
of curious bystanders, and had enjoyed the petty triumph of carrying her
off from a score of rivals. Noun would lovingly remind him of that day;
she did not know, poor child, that Raymon's love did not date back so
far, and that her day of pride had been only a day of vanity to him. And
then the courage with which she sacrificed her reputation to him--that
courage which should have made him love her all the more--displeased
Monsieur de Ramière. The wife of a peer of France who should sacrifice
herself so recklessly would be a priceless conquest; but a lady's maid!
That which is heroism in the one becomes brazen-faced effrontery in the
other. With the one a world of jealous rivals envies you; with the other
a rabble of scandalized flunkeys condemns you. The lady of quality
sacrifices twenty previous lovers to you; the lady's maid sacrifices
only a husband that she might have had.

What can you expect? Raymon was a man of fashionable morals, of elegant
manners, of poetic passion. In his eyes a grisette was not a woman, and
Noun, by virtue of a beauty of the first order, had taken him by
surprise on a day of popular merrymaking. All this was not Raymon's
fault; he had been reared to shine in society, all his thoughts had been
directed toward an exalted goal, all his faculties had been moulded to
enjoy princely good fortune, and the ardor of his blood had led him into
bourgeois amours against his will. He had done all that he possibly
could do to prolong his enjoyment, but he had failed; what was he to do
now? Ideas extravagant in generosity had passed through his brain; on
the days when he was most in love with his mistress he had thought
seriously of raising her to his level, of legitimizing their union. Yes,
upon my honor, he had thought of it; but love, which legitimizes
everything, was growing weaker now; it was passing away with the perils
of the intrigue and the piquant charm of mystery. Marriage was no longer
possible; and note this: Raymon reasoned very cogently and altogether in
his mistress's favor.

If he had really loved her, he could, by sacrificing to her his future,
his family and his reputation, still have found happiness, and,
consequently, have made her happy; for love is a contract no less than
marriage. But, his ardor having cooled as he felt that it had, what
future could he create for her? Should he marry her and display day
after day a gloomy face, a cold heart, a comfortless home? Should he
marry her and make her odious to her family, contemptible in the eyes of
her equals, and a laughing-stock to her servants; take the risk of
introducing her in a social circle where she would feel that she was out
of place; where humiliation would kill her; and, lastly, overwhelm her
with remorse by forcing her to realize all the trials she had brought
upon her lover?

No, you will agree with him that it was impossible, that it would not
have been generous, that a man cannot contend thus with society, and
that such heroic virtue resembles Don Quixote breaking his lance against
a windmill; an iron courage which a breath of wind scatters; the
chivalry of another age which arouses the pitying contempt of this age.

Having thus weighed all the arguments, Monsieur de Ramière concluded
that it would be better to break that unfortunate bond. Noun's visits
were beginning to be painful to him. His mother, who had gone to Paris
for the winter, would not fail to hear of the little scandal before
long. Even now she was surprised at his frequent visits to Cercy, their
country estate, and at his passing whole weeks there. He had, to be
sure, alleged as a pretext, an important piece of work which he was
finishing away from the noise of the city; but that pretext was
beginning to be worn out. It grieved Raymon to deceive so kind a mother,
to deprive her for so long a time of his filial attentions; and--how
shall I tell you?--he left Cercy and did not return.

Noun wept and waited, and as the days and weeks passed, unhappy creature
that she was, she ventured so far as to write. Poor girl! that was the
last stroke. A letter from a lady's maid! Yet she had taken
satin-finished paper and perfumed wax from Madame Delmare's desk, and
her style from her heart. But the spelling! Do you know how much energy
a syllable more or less adds to or detracts from the sentiments? Alas!
the poor half-civilized girl from Ile Bourbon did not know even that
there were rules for the use of language. She believed that she wrote
and spoke as correctly as her mistress, and when she found that Raymon
did not return she said to herself:

"And yet my letter was well adapted to bring him."

That letter Raymon lacked courage to read to the end. It was a
masterpiece of ingenuous and graceful passion; it is doubtful if
Virginia wrote Paul a more charming one after she left her native land.
But Monsieur de Ramière made haste to throw it in the fire, fearful
lest he should blush for himself. Once more, what do you expect? This is
a prejudice of education, and self-love is a part of love just as
self-interest is a part of friendship.

Monsieur de Ramière's absence had been noticed in society; that is much
to say of a man, in respect to this society of ours where all men
resemble one another. One may be a man of intelligence and still care
for society, just as one may be a fool and despise it. Raymon liked it,
and he was justified in his liking, for he was a favorite and was much
sought after; and that multitude of indifferent or sneering masks
assumed for him attentive and interested smiles. Unfortunate men may be
misanthropes, but those persons of whom one is fond are rarely
ungrateful; at least so Raymon thought. He was grateful for the
slightest manifestations of attachment, desirous of universal esteem,
proud of having a large number of friends.

In this society, whose prejudices are absolute, everything had succeeded
in his case, even his faults; and when he sought the cause of this
universal affection which had always encompassed him, he found it in
himself, in his longing to obtain it, in the joy it caused him, in the
hearty kindliness which he dealt out lavishly without exhausting it.

He owed it in some measure to his mother too, whose superior
intelligence, sparkling conversation and private virtues made her an
exceptional woman. It was from her that he inherited those excellent
principles which always led him back to the right path and prevented
him, despite the impetuosity of his twenty-five years, from ever
forfeiting his claim to public esteem. Moreover, people were more
indulgent to him than to others because his mother had the knack of
apologizing for him while blaming him, of commanding indulgence when she
seemed to implore it. She was one of those women who had lived through
different epochs so utterly dissimilar that their minds become as
flexible as their destinies; who have grown rich on experience of
misfortune; who have escaped the scaffolds of '93, the vices of the
Directory, the vanities of the Empire and the enmities of the
Restoration; rare women, whose kind is dying out.

It was at a ball at the Spanish ambassador's that Raymon reappeared in
society.

"Monsieur de Ramière, if I am not mistaken," said a pretty woman to her
neighbor.

"He is a comet who appears at irregular intervals," was the reply. "It
is centuries since any one heard of the pretty fellow."

The lady who spoke thus was a middle-aged foreigner. Her companion
blushed slightly.

"He's very good-looking, is he not, madame?" she said.

"Charming, on my word," replied the old Sicilian.

"You are talking about the hero of the eclectic salons, the dark-eyed
Raymon, I'll be bound," said a dashing colonel of the guard.

"He has a fine head to study," rejoined the younger woman.

"And what pleases you even more, I dare say," said the colonel, "a
wicked head."

The young woman was his wife.

"Why a wicked head?" queried the Sicilian.

"Full of genuine Southern passions, madame, worthy of the bright
sunlight of Palermo."

Two or three young women put forward their flower-laden heads to hear
what the colonel was saying.

"He made ravages in the garrison last year, I promise you," he
continued. "We fellows shall be obliged to pick a quarrel with him, in
order to get rid of him."

"If he's a Lovelace, so much the worse for him," said a young lady with
a satirical cast of countenance; "I can't endure men whom everybody
loves."

The ultramontane countess waited until the colonel had walked away, when
she tapped Mademoiselle de Nangy's fingers lightly with her fan and
said:

"Don't speak so; you don't know here what to think of a man who wants to
be liked."

"Do you think, pray, that all they have to do is to want it?" said the
damsel with the long sardonic eyes.

"Mademoiselle," said the colonel, coming up again to invite her to
dance; "take care that the charming Raymon does not overhear you."

Mademoiselle de Nangy laughed; but during the rest of the evening the
pretty group of which she was one dared not mention Monsieur de
Ramière's name again.