Voyage of the two inhabitants of Sirius and Saturn.


Our two philosophers were just ready to take off into Saturn's
atmosphere with a very nice provision of mathematical instrument when
the ruler of Saturn, who had heard news of the departure, came in
tears to remonstrate. She was a pretty, petite brunette who was only
660 fathoms tall, but who compensated for this small size with many
other charms.

"Cruelty!" she cried, "after resisting you for 1,500 years, just when
I was beginning to come around, when I'd spent hardly a hundred[1]
years in your arms, you leave me to go on a voyage with a giant from
another world; go, you're only curious, you've never been in love: if
you were a true Saturnian, you would be faithful. Where are you
running off to? What do you want? Our five moons are less errant than
you, our ring less inconsistent. It's over, I will never love anyone
ever again."

The philosopher embraced her, cried with her, philosopher that he
was; and the woman, after swooning, went off to console herself with
the help of one of the dandies of the country.


[1] The 1773 edition is the first that reads "a hundred"; all the
earlier editions read: "two hundred."  B.


Our two explorers left all the same; they alighted first on the ring,
which they found to be fairly flat, as conjectured by an illustrious
inhabitant of our little sphere[2]; from there they went easily from
moon to moon. A comet passed by the last; they flew onto it with
their servants and their instruments. When they had traveled about
one hundred fifty million leagues, they met with the satellites of
Jupiter. They stopped at Jupiter and stayed for a week, during which
time they learned some very wonderful secrets that would have been
forthcoming in print if not for the inquisition, which found some of
the propositions to be a little harsh. But I have read the manuscript
in the library of the illustrious archbishop of...., who with a
generosity and goodness that is impossible to praise allowed me to
see his books. I promised him a long article in the first edition of
Moréri, and I will not forget his children, who give such a great
hope of perpetuating the race of their illustrious father.


[2] Huygens.  See volume XXVI, page 398.  B.


But let us now return to our travelers. Upon leaving Jupiter they
traversed a space of around one hundred million leagues and
approached the planet Mars, which, as we know, is five times smaller
than our own; they swung by two moons that cater to this planet but
have escaped the notice of our astronomers. I know very well that
Father Castel will write, perhaps even agreeably enough, against the
existence of these two moons; but I rely on those who reason by
analogy. These good philosophers know how unlikely it would be for
Mars, so far from the sun, to have gotten by with less than two
moons. Whatever the case may be, our explorers found it so small that
they feared not being able to land on it, and they passed it by like
two travelers disdainful of a bad village cabaret, pressing on
towards a neighboring city. But the Sirian and his companion soon
regretted it. They traveled a long time without finding anything.
Finally they perceived a small candle, it was earth; this was a
pitiful sight to those who had just left Jupiter. Nevertheless, from
fear of further regret, they resolved to touch down. Carried by the
tail of a comet, and finding an aurora borealis at the ready, they
started towards it, and arrived at Earth on the northern coast of the
Baltic sea, July 5, 1737, new style.