     PISTOL.  And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys,
     And happy news of price.
     FALSTAFF.  I prithee now deliver them like to men of this world.
     PISTOL.  A foutra for the world, and worldlings base!
     I speak of Africa, and golden joys.    --HENRY IV. PART II.

The public room of the Black Bear at Cumnor, to which the scene of
our story now returns, boasted, on the evening which we treat of,
no ordinary assemblage of guests. There had been a fair in the
neighbourhood, and the cutting mercer of Abingdon, with some of the
other personages whom the reader has already been made acquainted with,
as friends and customers of Giles Gosling, had already formed their
wonted circle around the evening fire, and were talking over the news of
the day.

A lively, bustling, arch fellow, whose pack, and oaken ellwand studded
duly with brass points, denoted him to be of Autolycus's profession,
occupied a good deal of the attention, and furnished much of the
amusement, of the evening. The pedlars of those days, it must be
remembered, were men of far greater importance than the degenerate
and degraded hawkers of our modern times. It was by means of these
peripatetic venders that the country trade, in the finer manufactures
used in female dress particularly, was almost entirely carried on; and
if a merchant of this description arrived at the dignity of travelling
with a pack-horse, he was a person of no small consequence, and company
for the most substantial yeoman or franklin whom he might meet in his
wanderings.

The pedlar of whom we speak bore, accordingly, an active and unrebuked
share in the merriment to which the rafters of the bonny Black Bear
of Cumnor resounded. He had his smile with pretty Mistress Cicely, his
broad laugh with mine host, and his jest upon dashing Master Goldthred,
who, though indeed without any such benevolent intention on his own
part, was the general butt of the evening. The pedlar and he were
closely engaged in a dispute upon the preference due to the Spanish
nether-stock over the black Gascoigne hose, and mine host had just
winked to the guests around him, as who should say, "You will have mirth
presently, my masters," when the trampling of horses was heard in the
courtyard, and the hostler was loudly summoned, with a few of the newest
oaths then in vogue to add force to the invocation. Out tumbled Will
Hostler, John Tapster, and all the militia of the inn, who had slunk
from their posts in order to collect some scattered crumbs of the mirth
which was flying about among the customers. Out into the yard sallied
mine host himself also, to do fitting salutation to his new guests; and
presently returned, ushering into the apartment his own worthy nephew,
Michael Lambourne, pretty tolerably drunk, and having under his escort
the astrologer. Alasco, though still a little old man, had, by altering
his gown to a riding-dress, trimming his beard and eyebrows, and so
forth, struck at least a score of years from his apparent age, and
might now seem an active man of sixty, or little upwards. He appeared at
present exceedingly anxious, and had insisted much with Lambourne that
they should not enter the inn, but go straight forward to the place of
their destination. But Lambourne would not be controlled. "By Cancer and
Capricorn," he vociferated, "and the whole heavenly host, besides all
the stars that these blessed eyes of mine have seen sparkle in the
southern heavens, to which these northern blinkers are but farthing
candles, I will be unkindly for no one's humour--I will stay and salute
my worthy uncle here. Chesu! that good blood should ever be forgotten
betwixt friends!--A gallon of your best, uncle, and let it go round to
the health of the noble Earl of Leicester! What! shall we not collogue
together, and warm the cockles of our ancient kindness?--shall we not
collogue, I say?"

"With all my heart, kinsman," said mine host, who obviously wished to be
rid of him; "but are you to stand shot to all this good liquor?"

This is a question has quelled many a jovial toper, but it moved not
the purpose of Lambourne's soul, "Question my means, nuncle?" he said,
producing a handful of mixed gold and silver pieces; "question Mexico
and Peru--question the Queen's exchequer--God save her Majesty!--she is
my good Lord's good mistress."

"Well, kinsman," said mine host, "it is my business to sell wine to
those who can buy it--so, Jack Tapster, do me thine office. But I would
I knew how to come by money as lightly as thou dost, Mike."

"Why, uncle," said Lambourne, "I will tell thee a secret. Dost see this
little old fellow here? as old and withered a chip as ever the devil put
into his porridge--and yet, uncle, between you and me--he hath Potosi
in that brain of his--'sblood! he can coin ducats faster than I can vent
oaths."

"I will have none of his coinage in my purse, though, Michael," said
mine host; "I know what belongs to falsifying the Queen's coin."

"Thou art an ass, uncle, for as old as thou art.--Pull me not by the
skirts, doctor, thou art an ass thyself to boot--so, being both asses, I
tell ye I spoke but metaphorically."

"Are you mad?" said the old man; "is the devil in you? Can you not let
us begone without drawing all men's eyes on us?"

"Sayest thou?" said Lambourne. "Thou art deceived now--no man shall see
you, an I give the word.--By heavens, masters, an any one dare to look
on this old gentleman, I will slash the eyes out of his head with
my poniard!--So sit down, old friend, and be merry; these are mine
ingles--mine ancient inmates, and will betray no man."

"Had you not better withdraw to a private apartment, nephew?" said
Giles Gosling. "You speak strange matter," he added, "and there be
intelligencers everywhere."

"I care not for them," said the magnanimous Michael--"intelligencers?
pshaw! I serve the noble Earl of Leicester.--Here comes the wine.--Fill
round, Master Skinker, a carouse to the health of the flower of England,
the noble Earl of Leicester! I say, the noble Earl of Leicester! He that
does me not reason is a swine of Sussex, and I'll make him kneel to the
pledge, if I should cut his hams and smoke them for bacon."

None disputed a pledge given under such formidable penalties; and
Michael Lambourne, whose drunken humour was not of course diminished
by this new potation, went on in the same wild way, renewing his
acquaintance with such of the guests as he had formerly known, and
experiencing a reception in which there was now something of deference
mingled with a good deal of fear; for the least servitor of the
favourite Earl, especially such a man as Lambourne, was, for very
sufficient reasons, an object both of the one and of the other.

In the meanwhile, the old man, seeing his guide in this uncontrollable
humour, ceased to remonstrate with him, and sitting down in the most
obscure corner of the room, called for a small measure of sack, over
which he seemed, as it were, to slumber, withdrawing himself as much as
possible from general observation, and doing nothing which could recall
his existence to the recollection of his fellow-traveller, who by this
time had got into close intimacy with his ancient comrade, Goldthred of
Abingdon.

"Never believe me, bully Mike," said the mercer, "if I am not as glad to
see thee as ever I was to see a customer's money! Why, thou canst give
a friend a sly place at a mask or a revel now, Mike; ay, or, I warrant
thee, thou canst say in my lord's ear, when my honourable lord is down
in these parts, and wants a Spanish ruff or the like--thou canst say in
his ear, There is mine old friend, young Lawrence Goldthred of Abingdon,
has as good wares, lawn, tiffany, cambric, and so forth--ay, and is as
pretty a piece of man's flesh, too, as is in Berkshire, and will ruffle
it for your lordship with any man of his inches; and thou mayest say--"

"I can say a hundred d--d lies besides, mercer," answered Lambourne;
"what, one must not stand upon a good word for a friend!"

"Here is to thee, Mike, with all my heart," said the mercer; "and thou
canst tell one the reality of the new fashions too. Here was a rogue
pedlar but now was crying up the old-fashioned Spanish nether-stock over
the Gascoigne hose, although thou seest how well the French hose set
off the leg and knee, being adorned with parti-coloured garters and
garniture in conformity."

"Excellent, excellent," replied Lambourne; "why, thy limber bit of a
thigh, thrust through that bunch of slashed buckram and tiffany, shows
like a housewife's distaff when the flax is half spun off!"

"Said I not so?" said the mercer, whose shallow brain was now overflowed
in his turn; "where, then, where be this rascal pedlar?--there was a
pedlar here but now, methinks.--Mine host, where the foul fiend is this
pedlar?"

"Where wise men should be, Master Goldthred," replied Giles Gosling;
"even shut up in his private chamber, telling over the sales of to-day,
and preparing for the custom of to-morrow."

"Hang him, a mechanical chuff!" said the mercer; "but for shame, it
were a good deed to ease him of his wares--a set of peddling knaves, who
stroll through the land, and hurt the established trader. There are good
fellows in Berkshire yet, mine host--your pedlar may be met withal on
Maiden Castle."

"Ay," replied mine host, laughing, "and he who meets him may meet his
match--the pedlar is a tall man."

"Is he?" said Goldthred.

"Is he?" replied the host; "ay, by cock and pie is he--the very pedlar
he who raddled Robin Hood so tightly, as the song says,--


     'Now Robin Hood drew his sword so good,
     The pedlar drew his brand,
     And he hath raddled him, Robin Hood,
     Till he neither could see nor stand.'"

"Hang him, foul scroyle, let him pass," said the mercer; "if he be such
a one, there were small worship to be won upon him.--And now tell me,
Mike--my honest Mike, how wears the Hollands you won of me?"

"Why, well, as you may see, Master Goldthred," answered Mike; "I will
bestow a pot on thee for the handsel.--Fill the flagon, Master Tapster."

"Thou wilt win no more Hollands, think, on such wager, friend Mike,"
 said the mercer; "for the sulky swain, Tony Foster, rails at thee all to
nought, and swears you shall ne'er darken his doors again, for that your
oaths are enough to blow the roof off a Christian man's dwelling."

"Doth he say so, the mincing, hypocritical miser?" vociferated
Lambourne. "Why, then, he shall come down and receive my commands here,
this blessed night, under my uncle's roof! And I will ring him such a
black sanctus, that he shall think the devil hath him by the skirts for
a month to come, for barely hearing me."

"Nay, now the pottle-pot is uppermost, with a witness!" said the mercer.
"Tony Foster obey thy whistle! Alas! good Mike, go sleep--go sleep."

"I tell thee what, thou thin-faced gull," said Michael Lambourne, in
high chafe, "I will wager thee fifty angels against the first five
shelves of thy shop, numbering upward from the false light, with all
that is on them, that I make Tony Foster come down to this public-house
before we have finished three rounds."

"I will lay no bet to that amount," said the mercer, something
sobered by an offer which intimated rather too private a knowledge on
Lambourne's part of the secret recesses of his shop. "I will lay no such
wager," he said; "but I will stake five angels against thy five, if thou
wilt, that Tony Foster will not leave his own roof, or come to ale-house
after prayer time, for thee, or any man."

"Content," said Lambourne.--"Here, uncle, hold stakes, and let one
of your young bleed-barrels there--one of your infant tapsters--trip
presently up to The Place, and give this letter to Master Foster, and
say that I, his ingle, Michael Lambourne, pray to speak with him at mine
uncle's castle here, upon business of grave import.--Away with thee,
child, for it is now sundown, and the wretch goeth to bed with the birds
to save mutton-suet--faugh!"

Shortly after this messenger was dispatched--an interval which was spent
in drinking and buffoonery--he returned with the answer that Master
Foster was coming presently.

"Won, won!" said Lambourne, darting on the stakes.

"Not till he comes, if you please," said the mercer, interfering.

"Why, 'sblood, he is at the threshold," replied Michael.--"What said he,
boy?"

"If it please your worship," answered the messenger, "he looked out of
window, with a musquetoon in his hand, and when I delivered your errand,
which I did with fear and trembling, he said, with a vinegar aspect,
that your worship might be gone to the infernal regions."

"Or to hell, I suppose," said Lambourne--"it is there he disposes of all
that are not of the congregation."

"Even so," said the boy; "I used the other phrase as being the more
poetical."

"An ingenious youth," said Michael; "shalt have a drop to whet thy
poetical whistle. And what said Foster next?"

"He called me back," answered the boy, "and bid me say you might come to
him if you had aught to say to him."

"And what next?" said Lambourne.

"He read the letter, and seemed in a fluster, and asked if your worship
was in drink; and I said you were speaking a little Spanish, as one who
had been in the Canaries."

"Out, you diminutive pint-pot, whelped of an overgrown reckoning!"
 replied Lambourne--"out! But what said he then?"

"Why," said the boy, "he muttered that if he came not your worship would
bolt out what were better kept in; and so he took his old flat cap,
and threadbare blue cloak, and, as I said before, he will be here
incontinent."

"There is truth in what he said," replied Lambourne, as if speaking to
himself--"my brain has played me its old dog's trick. But corragio--let
him approach!--I have not rolled about in the world for many a day to
fear Tony Foster, be I drunk or sober.--Bring me a flagon of cold water
to christen my sack withal."

While Lambourne, whom the approach of Foster seemed to have recalled to
a sense of his own condition, was busied in preparing to receive him,
Giles Gosling stole up to the apartment of the pedlar, whom he found
traversing the room in much agitation.

"You withdrew yourself suddenly from the company," said the landlord to
the guest.

"It was time, when the devil became one among you," replied the pedlar.

"It is not courteous in you to term my nephew by such a name," said
Gosling, "nor is it kindly in me to reply to it; and yet, in some sort,
Mike may be considered as a limb of Satan."

"Pooh--I talk not of the swaggering ruffian," replied the pedlar; "it is
of the other, who, for aught I know--But when go they? or wherefore come
they?"

"Marry, these are questions I cannot answer," replied the host.
"But look you, sir, you have brought me a token from worthy Master
Tressilian--a pretty stone it is." He took out the ring, and looked at
it, adding, as he put it into his purse again, that it was too rich a
guerdon for anything he could do for the worthy donor. He was, he said,
in the public line, and it ill became him to be too inquisitive into
other folk's concerns. He had already said that he could hear nothing
but that the lady lived still at Cumnor Place in the closest seclusion,
and, to such as by chance had a view of her, seemed pensive and
discontented with her solitude. "But here," he said, "if you are
desirous to gratify your master, is the rarest chance that hath occurred
for this many a day. Tony Foster is coming down hither, and it is but
letting Mike Lambourne smell another wine-flask, and the Queen's command
would not move him from the ale-bench. So they are fast for an hour or
so. Now, if you will don your pack, which will be your best excuse, you
may, perchance, win the ear of the old servant, being assured of the
master's absence, to let you try to get some custom of the lady; and
then you may learn more of her condition than I or any other can tell
you."

"True--very true," answered Wayland, for he it was; "an excellent
device, but methinks something dangerous--for, say Foster should
return?"

"Very possible indeed," replied the host.

"Or say," continued Wayland, "the lady should render me cold thanks for
my exertions?"

"As is not unlikely," replied Giles Gosling. "I marvel Master Tressilian
will take such heed of her that cares not for him."

"In either case I were foully sped," said Wayland, "and therefore I do
not, on the whole, much relish your device."

"Nay, but take me with you, good master serving-man," replied mine host.
"This is your master's business, and not mine, you best know the risk to
be encountered, or how far you are willing to brave it. But that which
you will not yourself hazard, you cannot expect others to risk."

"Hold, hold," said Wayland; "tell me but one thing--goes yonder old man
up to Cumnor?"

"Surely, I think so?" said the landlord; "their servant said he was to
take their baggage thither. But the ale-tap has been as potent for him
as the sack-spigot has been for Michael."

"It is enough," said Wayland, assuming an air of resolution. "I will
thwart that old villain's projects; my affright at his baleful aspect
begins to abate, and my hatred to arise. Help me on with my pack, good
mine host.--And look to thyself, old Albumazar; there is a malignant
influence in thy horoscope, and it gleams from the constellation Ursa
Major."

So saying, he assumed his burden, and, guided by the landlord through
the postern gate of the Black Bear, took the most private way from
thence up to Cumnor Place.