REJECTED SUITORS--CONCLUSION

     (Greek passage)

     May the Gods grant what your best hopes pursue,
     A husband, and a home, with concord true;
     No greater boon from Jove's ethereal dome
     Descends, than concord in the nuptial home
     --Ulysses to Nausicaa, in the sixth book of the Odyssey.

What passed between Algernon and Morgana, when the twenty-eighth morning
brought his probation to a close, it is unnecessary to relate. The
gentleman being predetermined to propose, and the lady to accept, there
was little to be said, but that little was conclusive.

Mr. Gryll was delighted. His niece could not have made a choice more
thoroughly to his mind.

'My dear Morgana,' he said, 'all's well that ends well. Your
fastidiousness in choice has arrived at a happy termination. And now you
will perhaps tell me why you rejected so many suitors, to whom you had
in turn accorded a hearing. In the first place, what was your objection
to the Honourable Escor A'Cass?{1} He was a fine, handsome, dashing
fellow. He was the first in the field, and you seemed to like him.'

     1 To-the-Crows: the Athenian equivalent for our o'-the-
     Devil: a gambler's journey: not often a long one.

_Miss Gryll._ He was too dashing, uncle: he gambled. I did like him,
till I discovered his evil propensity.

_Mr. Gryll._ To Sir Alley Capel? 'My dear Marcotta, all's well that mix
well.

_Miss Gryll._ He speculated; which is only another name for gambling.
He never knew from day to day whether he was a rich man or a beggar. He
lived in a perpetual fever, and I wish to live in tranquillity.

_Mr. Gryll._ To Mr. Ballot?

_Miss Gryll._ He thought of nothing but politics: he had no feeling
of poetry. There was never a more complete negation of sympathy, than
between him and me.

_Mr. Gryll._ To Sir John Pachyderm?

_Miss Gryll._ He was a mere man of the world, with no feeling of
any kind: tolerable in company, but tiresome beyond description in a
tête-à-tête. I did not choose that he should bestow all his tediousness
on me.

_Mr. Gryll._ To Mr. Enavant?

_Miss Gryll._ He was what is called a fast man, and was always talking
of slow coaches. I had no fancy for living in an express train. I like
to go quietly through life, and to see all that lies in my way.

_Mr. Gryll._ To Mr. Geront?

_Miss Gryll._ He had only one fault, but that one was unpardonable. He
was too old. To do him justice, he did not begin as a lover. Seeing that
I took pleasure in his society, he was led by degrees into fancying that
I might accept him as a husband. I liked his temper, his acquirements,
his conversation, his love of music and poetry, his devotion to domestic
life. But age and youth cannot harmonise in marriage.

_Mr. Gryll._ To Mr. Long Owen?

_Miss Gryll._ He was in debt, and kept it secret from me. I thought
he only wanted my fortune: but be that as it might, the concealment
destroyed my esteem.

_Mr. Gryll._ To Mr. Larvel?

_Miss Gryll._ He was too ugly. Expression may make plain features
agreeable, and I tried if daily intercourse would reconcile me to his.
But no. His ugliness was unredeemed.

_Mr. Gryll._ None of these objections applied to Lord Curryfin?

_Miss Gryll._ No, uncle; but he came too late. And besides, he soon
found what suited him better.

_Mr. Gryll._ There were others. Did any of the same objections apply to
them all?

_Miss Gryll._ Indeed, uncle, the most of them were nothing; or at best,
mere suits of good clothes; men made, as it were, to pattern by the
dozen; selfish, frivolous, without any earnest pursuit, or desire to
have one; ornamental drawing-room furniture, no more distinguishable in
memory than a set of chairs.

_Mr. Gryll._ Well, my dear Morgana, for mere negations there is no
remedy; but for positive errors, even for gambling, it strikes me they
are curable.

_Miss Gryll._ No, uncle. Even my limited observation has shown me that
men are easily cured of unfashionable virtues, but never of fashionable
vices.

Miss Gryll and Miss Niphet arranged that their respective marriages
and those of the seven sisters should be celebrated at the same time
and place. In the course of their castle-building before marriage, Miss
Niphet said to her intended:

'When I am your wife, I shall release you from your promise of not
trying experiments with horses, carriages, boats, and so forth; but with
this proviso, that if ever you do try a dangerous experiment, it shall
be in my company.'

'No, dear Alice,' he answered; 'you will make my life too dear to me,
to risk it in any experiment. You shall be my guiding star, and the only
question I shall ask respecting my conduct in life will be, Whether it
pleases you?'

Some natural tears they shed, but wiped them soon, might have been
applied to the sisters, when they stepped, on their bridal morning, into
the carriages which were to convey them to the Grange.

It was the dissipation of a dream too much above mortal frailty, too
much above the contingencies of chance and change, to be permanently
realised. But the damsels had consented, and the suitors rejoiced; and
if ever there was a man on earth with 'his saul abune the moon,' it was
Harry Hedgerow, on the bright February morning that gave him the hand of
his _Dorothy._

There was a grand _déjeuner_ at Gryll Grange. There were the nine
brides and the nine bridegrooms; a beautiful array of bridesmaids; a few
friends of Mr. Gryll, Mr. Niphet, Lord Curryfin, and Mr. Falconer; and a
large party at the lower end of the hall, composed of fathers, mothers,
and sisters of the bridegrooms of the seven Vestals. None of the
bridegrooms had brothers, and Harry had neither mother nor sister;
but his father was there in rustic portliness, looking, as Harry had
anticipated, as if he were all but made young again.

Among the most conspicuous of the party were the Reverend Doctor Opimian
and his lady, who had on this occasion stepped out of her domestic
seclusion. In due course, the reverend doctor stood up and made a
speech, which may be received as the epilogue of our comedy.

_The Rev. Dr. Opimian._ We are here to do honour to the nuptials; first,
of the niece of our excellent host, a young lady whom to name is to
show her title to the love and respect of all present; with a young
gentleman, of whom to say that he is in every way worthy of her, is
to say all that can be said of him in the highest order of praise:
secondly, of a young lord and lady, to whom those who had the pleasure
of being here last Christmas are indebted for the large share of
enjoyment which their rare and diversified accomplishments, and their
readiness to contribute in every way to social entertainment, bestowed
on the assembled party; and who, both in contrast and congeniality,--for
both these elements enter into perfect fitness of companionship--may
be considered to have been expressly formed for each other: thirdly, of
seven other young couples, on many accounts most interesting to us all,
who enter on the duties of married life with as fair expectation of
happiness as can reasonably be entertained in this diurnal sphere.
An old Greek poet says:--'Four things are good for man in this world:
first, health; second, personal beauty; third, riches, not dishonourably
acquired; fourth, to pass life among friends.'{1} But thereon says the
comic poet Anaxandrides: 'Health is rightly placed first; but riches
should have been second; for what is beauty ragged and starving?'{2}

     1 (Greek passage)
     SIMONIDES.

     2 AthenÆus: 1. xv. p. 694.

Be this as it may, we here see them all four: health in its brightest
bloom; riches in two instances; more than competence in the other seven;
beauty in the brides, good looks as far as young men need them, in the
bridegrooms, and as bright a prospect of passing life among friends as
ever shone on any. Most earnestly do I hope that the promise of their
marriage morning may be fulfilled in its noon and in its sunset: and
when I add, may they all be as happy in their partners as I have been, I
say what all who knew the excellent person beside me will feel to be
the best good wish in my power to bestow. And now to the health of the
brides and bridegrooms, in bumpers of champagne. Let all the attendants
stand by, each with a fresh bottle, with only one uncut string. Let all
the corks, when I give the signal, be discharged simultaneously; and we
will receive it as a peal of Bacchic ordnance, in honour of the Power of
Joyful Event,{1} whom we may assume to be presiding on this auspicious
occasion.

     1 This was a Roman deity. Invocato hilaro atque prospéra
     Eventu.--APULEIUS: Metamorph. 1. iv.