ARISTOPHANES IN LONDON

          Non duco contentionis funern, dum constet inter nos, quod
          fere totus mundus exerceat histrioniam.--Petronius Arbiter.

          I do not draw the rope of contention,{1} while it is agreed
          amongst us, that almost the whole world practises acting.

     1 A metaphor apparently taken from persons pulling in
     opposite directions at each end of a rope. I cannot see, as
     some have done, that it has anything in common with Horace's
     _Tortum digna sequi potius quant ducere funern_: 'More
     worthy to follow than to lead the tightened cord': which is
     a metaphor taken from a towing line, or any line acting in a
     similar manner, where one draws and another is drawn. Horace
     applies it to money, which he says should be the slave, and
     not the master of its possessor.

          All the world's a stage.--Shakespeare.

          En el teatro del mundo
          Todos son représentantes.--Calderon.

          Tous les comédiens ne sont pas au théâtre.
          --_French Proverb._

Rain came, and thaw, followed by drying wind. The roads were in good
order for the visitors to the Aristophanic comedy. The fifth day of
Christmas was fixed for the performance. The theatre was brilliantly
lighted, with spermaceti candles in glass chandeliers for the audience,
and argand lamps for the stage. In addition to Mr. Gryll's own houseful
of company, the beauty and fashion of the surrounding country, which
comprised an extensive circle, adorned the semicircular seats; which,
however, were not mere stone benches, but were backed, armed, and padded
into comfortable stalls. Lord Curryfin was in his glory, in the capacity
of stage-manager.

The curtain rising, as there was no necessity for its being made to
fall,{1} discovered the scene, which was on the London bank of the
Thames, on the terrace of a mansion occupied by the Spirit-rapping
Society, with an archway in the centre of the building, showing a street
in the background. Gryllus was lying asleep. Circe, standing over him,
began the dialogue.

     1 The Athenian theatre was open to the sky, and if the
     curtain had been made to fall it would have been folded up
     in mid air, destroying the effect of the scene. Being raised
     from below, it was invisible when not in use.


          CIRCE
          Wake, Gryllus, and arise in human form.

          GRYLLUS
          I have slept soundly, and had pleasant dreams.

          CIRCE
          I, too, have soundly slept--Divine how long.

          GRYLLUS
          Why, judging by the sun, some fourteen hours.

          CIRCE
          Three thousand years»

          GRYLLUS
          That is a nap indeed.
          But this is not your garden, nor your palace.
          Where are we now?

          CIRCE
          Three thousand years ago,
          This land was forest, and a bright pure river
          Ran through it to and from the Ocean stream.
          Now, through a wilderness of human forms,
          And human dwellings, a polluted flood
          Rolls up and down, charged with all earthly poisons,
          Poisoning the air in turn.

          GRYLLUS
          I see vast masses
          Of strange unnatural things.

          CIRCE
          Houses, and ships,
          And boats, and chimneys vomiting black smoke,
          Horses, and carriages of every form,
          And restless bipeds, rushing here and there
          For profit or for pleasure, as they phrase it.

          GRYLLUS
          Oh, Jupiter and Bacchus! what a crowd,
          Flitting, like shadows without mind or purpose,
          Such as Ulysses saw in Erebus.
          But wherefore are we here?

          CIRCE
          There have arisen
          Some mighty masters of the invisible world,
          And these have summoned us.

          GRYLLUS
          With what design?

          CIRCE
          That they themselves must tell. Behold they come,
          Carrying a mystic table, around which
          They work their magic spells. Stand by, and mark.

          [Three spirit-rappers appeared, carrying a table, which they
          placed on one side of the stage:]

          1. Carefully the table place,
          Let our gifted brother trace
          A ring around the enchanted space

          2. Let him tow'rd the table point
          With his first fore-finger joint,
          And with mesmerised beginning
          Set the sentient oak-slab spinning.

          3. Now it spins around, around,
          Sending forth a murmuring sound,
          By the initiate understood

          As of spirits in the wood.

          ALL.
          Once more Circe we invoke.

          CIRCE
          Here: not bound in ribs of oak,
          Nor, from wooden disk revolving,
          In strange sounds strange riddles solving,
          But in native form appearing,
          Plain to sight, as clear to heating.

          THE THREE
          Thee with wonder we behold.
          By thy hair of burning gold,
          By thy face with radiance bright,
          By thine eyes of beaming light,
          We confess thee, mighty one,
          For the daughter of the Sun.
          On thy form we gaze appalled.

          CIRCE
          Cryllus, loo, your summons called.

          THE THREE
          Hira of yore thy powerful spell
          Doomed in swinish shape to dwell;
          Vet such life he reckoned then
          Happier than the life of men,
          Now, when carefully he ponders
          All our scientific wonders,
          Steam-driven myriads, all in motion,
          On the land and on the ocean,
          Going, for the sake of going,
          Wheresoever waves are flowing,
          Wheresoever winds are blowing;
          Converse through the sea transmitted,
          Swift as ever thought has flitted;
          All the glories of our time,
          Past the praise of loftiest rhyme;
          Will he, seeing these, indeed,
          Still retain his ancient creed,
          Ranking, in his mental plan,
          Life of beast o'er life of man?

          CIRCE
          Speak, Gryllus.

          GRYLLUS
          It is early yet to judge:
          But all the novelties I yet have seen
          Seem changes for the worse.

          THE THREE
          If we could show him
          Our triumphs in succession, one by one,
          'Twould surely change his judgment: and herein
          How might'st thou aid us, Circe!

          CIRCE
          I will do so:
          And calling down, like Socrates, of yore,
          The clouds to aid us, they shall shadow forth,
          In bright succession, all that they behold,
          From air, on earth and sea. I wave my wand:
          And lo! they come, even as they came in Athens,
          Shining like virgins of ethereal life.

          The Chorus of Clouds descended, and a dazzling array of
          female beauty was revealed by degrees through folds of misty
          gauze. They sang their first choral song:

          CHORUS OF CLOUDS{1}

          Clouds ever-flowing, conspicuously soaring,
          From loud-rolling Ocean, whose stream{2} gave us birth
          To heights, whence we look over torrents down-pouring
          To the deep quiet vales of the fruit-giving earth,--
          As the broad eye of Æther, unwearied in brightness,
          Dissolves our mist-veil in glittering rays,
          Our forms we reveal from its vapoury lightness,
          In semblance immortal, with far-seeing gaze.

             1 The first stanza is pretty closely adapted from the
             strophe of Aristophanes. The second is only a distant
             imitation of the antistrophe.

             2 In Homer, and all the older poets, the ocean is a river
             surrounding the earth, and the seas are inlets from it.

          Shower-bearing Virgins, we seek not the regions
          Whence Pallas, the Muses, and Bacchus have fled,

          But the city, where Commerce embodies her legions,
          And Mammon exalts his omnipotent head.

          All joys of thought, feeling, and taste are before us,
          Wherever the beams of his favour are warm:

          Though transient full oft as the veil of our chorus,
          Now golden with glory, now passing in storm.


Reformers, scientific, moral, educational, political, passed in
succession, each answering a question of Gryllus. Gryllus observed, that
so far from everything being better than it had been, it seemed that
everything was wrong and wanted mending. The chorus sang its second
song.

Seven competitive examiners entered with another table, and sat down
on the opposite side of the stage to the spirit-rappers. They brought
forward Hermogenes{1} as a crammed fowl to argue with Gryllus. Gryllus
had the best of the argument; but the examiners adjudged the victory to
Hermogenes. The chorus sang its third song.

     1 See chapter xv.

Circe, at the request of the spirit-rappers, whose power was limited
to the production of sound, called up several visible spirits, all
illustrious in their day, but all appearing as in the days of their
early youth, 'before their renown was around them.' They were all
subjected to competitive examination, and were severally pronounced
disqualified for the pursuit in which they had shone. At last came one
whom Circe recommended to the examiners as a particularly promising
youth. He was a candidate for military life. Every question relative
to his profession he answered to the purpose. To every question not so
relevant he replied that he did not know and did not care. This drew on
him a reprimand. He was pronounced disqualified, and ordered to join the
rejected, who were ranged in a line along the back of the scene. A touch
of Circe's wand changed them into their semblance of maturer years.
Among them were Hannibal and Oliver Cromwell; and in the foreground
was the last candidate, Richard Coeur-de-Lion. Richard flourished his
battle-axe over the heads of the examiners, who jumped up in great
trepidation, overturned their table, tumbled over one another, and
escaped as best they might in haste and terror. The heroes vanished. The
chorus sang its fourth song.


     CHORUS
     As before the pike will fly
     Dace and roach and such small fry;
     As the leaf before the gale,
     As the chaff beneath the flail;
     As before the wolf the flocks,
     As before the hounds the fox;
     As before the cat the mouse,
     As the rat from falling house;
     As the fiend before the spell
     Of holy water, book, and bell;
     As the ghost from dawning day,--
     So has fled, in gaunt dismay,
     This septemvirate of quacks
     From the shadowy attacks
     Of Coeur-de-Lion's battle-axe.

     Could he in corporeal might,
     Plain to feeling as to sight,
     Rise again to solar light,
     How his arm would put to flight
     All the forms of Stygian night
     That round us rise in grim array,
     Darkening the meridian day:
     Bigotry, whose chief employ
     Is embittering earthly joy;
     Chaos, throned in pedant state,
     Teaching echo how to prate;
     And 'Ignorance, with looks profound,'
     Not 'with eye that loves the ground,'
     But stalking wide, with lofty crest,
     In science's pretentious vest.

     And now, great masters of the realms of shade,
     To end the task which called us down from air,
     We shall present, in pictured show arrayed,
     Of this your modern world the triumphs rare,

     That Gryllus's benighted spirit
     May wake to your transcendent merit,
     And, with profoundest admiration thrilled,
     He may with willing mind assume his place
     In your steam-nursed, steam-borne, steam-killed,
     And gas-enlightened race.

     CIRCE
     Speak, Gryllus, what you see,

     I see the ocean,
     And o'er its face ships passing wide and far;
     Some with expanded sails before the breeze,
     And some with neither sails nor oars, impelled
     By some invisible power against the wind,
     Scattering the spray before them, But of many
     One is on fire, and one has struck on rocks
     And melted in the waves like fallen snow.
     Two crash together in the middle sea,
     And go to pieces on the instant, leaving
     No soul to tell the tale, and one is hurled
     In fragments to the sky, strewing the deep
     With death and wreck. I had rather live with Circe
     Even as I was, than flit about the world
     In those enchanted ships which some Alastor
     Must have devised as traps for mortal ruin.

     Look yet again.

     Now the whole scene is changed.
     I see long chains of strange machines on wheels,
     With one in front of each, purring white smoke
     From a black hollow column. Fast and far
     They speed, like yellow leaves before the gale,
     When autumn winds are strongest. Through their windows
     I judge them thronged with people; but distinctly
     Their speed forbids my seeing.

     SPIRIT-RAPPER
     This is one
     Of the great glories of our modern time,
     * Men are become as birds,' and skim like swallows
     The surface of the world.

     GRYLLUS
     For what good end?

     SPIRIT-RAPPER
     The end is in itself--the end of skimming
     The surface of the world.

     GRYLLUS
     If that be all,
     I had rather sit in peace in my old home:
     But while I look, two of them meet and clash,
     And pile their way with ruin. One is rolled
     Down a steep bank; one through a broken bridge
     Is dashed into a flood. Dead, dying, wounded,
     Are there as in a battle-field. Are these
     Your modern triumphs? Jove preserve me from them.

     SPIRIT-RAPPER
     These ills are rare. Millions are borne in safety
     Where ore incurs mischance. Look yet again.

     GRYLLUS
     I see a mass of light brighter than that
     Which burned in Circe's palace, and beneath it
     A motley crew, dancing to joyous music.
     But from that light explosion comes, and flame;
     And forth the dancers rush in haste and fear
     From their wide-blazing hall.

     SPIRIT-RAPPER
     Oh, Circe! Circe!
     Thou show'st him all the evil of our arts
     In more than just proportion to the good.
     Good without evil is not given to man.
     Jove, from his urns dispensing good and ill,
     Gives all unmixed to some, and good and ill
     Mingled to many--good unmixed to none.{1}
     Our arts are good. The inevitable ill
     That mixes with them, as with all things human,
     Is as a drop of water in a goblet
     Full of old wine.

     1 This is the true sense of the Homeric passage:--

     (Greek passage)
     Homer: ii. xxiv.

     There are only two distributions: good and ill mixed, and
     unmixed ill. None, as Heyne has observed, receive unmixed
     good. Ex dolio bonorum....

     GRYLLUS
     More than one drop, I fear,
     And those of bitter water.

     CIRCE
     There is yet
     An ample field of scientific triumph:
     What shall we show him next?

     SFIRIT-RAPPER
     Pause we awhile,
     He is not in the mood to feel conviction
     Of our superior greatness. He is all
     For rural comfort and domestic ease,
     But our impulsive days are all for moving:
     Sometimes with some ulterior end, but still
     For moving, moving, always. There is nothing
     Common between us in our points of judgment.
     He takes his stand upon tranquillity,
     We ours upon excitement. There we place
     The being, end, and aim of mortal life,
     The many are with us: some few, perhaps,
     With him. We put the question to the vote
     By universal suffrage. Aid us, Circe I
     On tajismanic wings youi spells can waft
     The question and reply* Are we not wiser,
     Happier, and better, than the men of old,
     Of Homer's days, of Athens, and of Rome?

     VOICES WITHOUT
     Ay. No. Ay, ay. No. Ay, ay, ay, ay, ay,
     We are the wisest race the earth has known,
     The most advanced in all the arts of life,
     In science and in morals.

     ...nemo meracius accipit: hoc memorare omisit. This sense is
     implied, not expressed. Pope missed it in his otherwise
     beautiful translation.

     Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood,
     The source of evil one, and one of good;
     From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
     Blessings to these, to those distributes ills,
     To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed
     To taste the bad, unmixed, is curst indeed;
     Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
     He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
     --Pope.


     SPIRIT-RAPPER
     The ays have it.
     What is that wondrous sound, that seems like thunder
     Mixed with gigantic laughter?

     CIRCE
     It is Jupiter,
     Who laughs at your presumption; half in anger,
     And half in mockery. Now, my worthy masters,
     You must in turn experience in yourselves
     The mighty magic thus far tried on others.

     The table turned slowly, and by degrees went on spinning
     with accelerated speed. The legs assumed motion, and it
     danced off the stage. The arms of the chairs put forth
     hands, and pinched the spirit-rappers, who sprang up and ran
     off, pursued by their chairs. This piece of mechanical
     pantomime was a triumph of Lord Curryfin's art, and afforded
     him ample satisfaction for the failure of his resonant
     vases.

     CIRCE
     Now, Gryllus, we may seek our ancient home
     In my enchanted isle.

     GRYLLUS
     Not yet, not yet.
     Good signs are toward of a joyous supper.
     Therein the modern world may have its glory,
     And I, like an impartial judge, am ready
     To do it ample justice. But, perhaps,
     As all we hitherto have seen are shadows,
     So too may be the supper.

     CIRCE
     Fear not, Gryllus.
     That you will find a sound reality,
     To which the land and air, seas, lakes, and rivers,
     Have sent their several tributes. Now, kind friends,
     Who with your smiles have graciously rewarded
     Our humble, but most earnest aims to please,
     And with your presence at our festal board
     Will charm the winter midnight, Music gives
     The signal: Welcome and old wine await you.

     THE CHORUS
     Shadows to-night have offered portraits true
     Of many follies which the world enthrall.
     'Shadows we are, and shadows we pursue':
     But, in the banquet's well-illumined hall,
     Realides, delectable to all,
     Invite you now our festal joy to share.
     Could we our Attic prototype recall,
     One compound word should give our bill of fare: {1}
     But where our language fails, our hearts true welcome bear.

     1 As at the end of the Ecclesusæ

Miss Gryll was resplendent as Circe; and _Miss Niphet._, as leader of
the chorus, looked like Melpomene herself, slightly unbending her tragic
severity into that solemn smile which characterised the chorus of the
old comedy. The charm of the first acted irresistibly on _Mr. Falconer._
The second would have completed, if anything had been wanted to complete
it, the conquest of _Lord Curryfin._

The supper passed off joyously, and it was a late hour of the morning
before the company dispersed.