As a result of this scene Yudushka's life outwardly changed for
the better. Distracted by no material hindrances, he gave himself
completely over to his solitude, so that he did not even notice how the
summer passed away.

It was late in August, the days grew shorter; it drizzled ceaselessly
and the soil became boggy. The trees looked mournful, with their
yellow leaves bestrewing the ground. Absolute silence reigned in the
court-yard and about the servants' quarters. The domestics sat quietly
under cover, partly because of the weather, partly because they finally
perceived that something was the matter with the master. Yevpraksia
came completely to her senses, forgot the silk dresses and her lovers,
and sat in the maids' room for hours on end, brooding and wondering
what she could do. The drunken Prokhor teased her that she had designs
on the master's life, that she had poisoned him and she could not
escape the road to Siberia.

Meanwhile, Yudushka sat in his study, deep in reveries. The ceaseless
patter of the rain on the window-panes lulled him half to sleep--the
most favorable state for the play of his fancy. He imagined he was
invisible and was inspecting his possessions, accompanied by old Ilya,
who had served as bailiff under Yudushka's father, and whose bones had
long since been rotting in the village churchyard.

"Ilya is a clever fellow," argued Porfiry Vladimirych with himself,
glad that Ilya had arisen from the dead. "An old servant! Nowadays his
kind is getting rare. Nowadays they know how to chat and fidget, but
when it comes to business, they're good for nothing."

After saying an appropriate prayer, Yudushka and Ilya pick their way
leisurely across meadows and ravines, dales and hills, and soon reach
the Ukhovshchina waste. For a while they stand dazed, unable to believe
their own eyes. Straight before them looms up a magnificent pine
forest, their tops tossing in the wind. Some of the trees are so big in
circumference that two or even three men could not embrace them. Their
trunks are straight, naked, crowned with mighty, spreading tops--all
signs of vigor and longevity.

"What a forest, brother!" exclaims Yudushka, enraptured.

"This wood has been protected from felling," explains Ilya. "Under your
late grandfather Mikhail Vasilyevich, a procession with holy ikons went
around it. And look how tall the trees have grown."

"How large do you think the forest is?"

"At that time it held just seventy desyatins, and the desyatin was
then, as you know, one and a half times the present size."

"And how many trees, d'you think, are there on one desyatin?"

"I can't tell. Only God has counted them."

"I reckon there are no less than six or seven hundred trees to a
desyatin. I mean the desyatin now used. Wait! If we take the number to
be six hundred--or, let us say, six hundred and fifty trees, how many
trees are there on one hundred and five desyatins?"

Porfiry Vladimirych takes a sheet of paper and multiplies 105 by 65 and
gets 6,825 trees.

"Now, see here, if I were to sell all this timber, do you think I can
get ten rubles a tree?"

Old Ilya shakes his head.

"Ten is little," he says. "Look at these trees. Each trunk will give
two mill beams and some planks and boards and firewood. What do you
think is the price of a mill-wheel beam?"

Porfiry Vladimirych makes believe he does not know, although he figured
out everything to a kopek long ago.

"Here," continues the peasant, "a beam is worth ten rubles, but if
we take it to Moscow it will be worth its weight in gold. It is a
tremendous beam. You will hardly haul it on a three-horse team. And
think of the second beam that can be made out of the stem, and the
boards and laths and firewood, and branches. Twenty rubles, I should
think, is the lowest price for a tree."

Porfiry Vladimirych listens and takes in his words greedily. A clever,
faithful servant this Ilya. And how well he has picked out his help!
Old Vavilo, Ilya's assistant--he too has been resting in the churchyard
for a good many years--is quite worthy of his superior. The foresters,
too, are all tried, stalwart men, and the hounds at the corn lofts are
fierce. Both the men and the dogs are ready to grapple with the devil
himself for the master's good.

"Let's figure out, brother. If we sell the whole forest, what will it
come to?"

Porfiry Vladimirych again makes a mental calculation of the value of
a large beam, a smaller beam, a plank, a lath, the firewood and the
branches. He adds up, multiplies, now omitting fractions, now adding
them. Columns of numbers fill the sheet.

"Here is the total, brother," says Yudushka, showing Ilya's phantom an
altogether fabulous sum. The old servant is dazed.

"Is it not a little too large?" he says, pensively shrugging his
shoulders.

But Porfiry Vladimirych has already cast off all doubts and giggles
gleefully.

"You are a queer fellow, brother!" he exclaims. "It isn't I who say it,
it's the number that says it. There is a science called arithmetic.
It never tells a lie, brother! Well, this will do for Ukhovshchina.
Now let's have a look at Lisy-Yamy, brother. It's a long time since I
have been there. I have a strong suspicion the peasants have become
thievish. There's Garanka, the guard--I know, I know. Garanka is a
good, faithful guard, that's true enough. Still, you know. It seems to
me he is not what he used to be either."

They plough noiselessly and unseen through a birch thicket, and stop
suddenly, holding their breath. A peasant's cart lies sprawling across
the road on its side, and the peasant is standing by, looking at the
broken axle in perplexity. He has been standing there for some time,
cursing the axle and himself and whipping the horse now and then.
Finally he sees he cannot loaf there all day long. He looks around
and pricks up his ears to make sure no one is coming along the road.
Then he selects a suitable birch tree, and takes out an axe. Meanwhile
Yudushka stands motionless and watches. The young birch shudders, sways
and suddenly sinks to the ground like a sheaf of corn, reaped by the
sickle. The thief is about to lop off the length of an axle from the
trunk, but Yudushka has decided that the moment has come. He steals
upon him and in a trice snatches the axe from his hand.

"Ah!" is all the thief, taken red-handed, has time to exclaim.

"Ah!" Yudushka mimics him. "Are you allowed to steal timber? 'Ah!' Is
it your birch-tree you have just felled?"

"Forgive me, sir!"

"I forgave everyone long ago, brother. I am myself a sinner before the
Lord and I dare not judge another. It is the law, not I, that condemns
you. Take the tree you have felled to the manor-house and pay up a fine
of one ruble. In the meantime, I shall keep your axe. Don't you worry,
it is in good hands, brother."

Glad that he was able to prove to Ilya how well-grounded were his
suspicions in regard to Garanka, Yudushka transports himself in
imagination to the forester's cottage and reprimands him soundly. On
his way back home he catches three hens belonging to peasants in the
act of feeding on his oats.

Back in his study, he falls again to work, and a peculiar system of
household management is suddenly born in his brain. The system is based
on the assumption that all mankind suddenly has begun to steal his wood
and damage his fields by letting cattle graze upon them. But this does
not grieve Yudushka, on the contrary he rubs his hands in delight.

"Let your cattle graze on my fields, fell my trees. I shall be the
better off for it," he repeats, hugely pleased. Then he takes a fresh
sheet of paper and resumes his ciphering and reckoning. The problems
to be solved are these: First, how much oats grows on one desyatin and
what will the fines amount to if the peasants' hens scratch the oats
up? And, second, how many birches grow in Lisy-Yamy and how much money
can they bring in if the peasants fell them illegally and pay the fine?
"A birch, though felled," reflects Yudushka gleefully, "will in the end
get to the house and be used as firewood--firewood free of charge, mind
you!"

Long rows of figures appear on the paper. Yudushka becomes so tired
and excited that he rises from the table all perspiring and lies down
on the sofa to rest. Here his imagination does not cease its work, it
merely selects an easier theme.

"Mamma was a clever woman, mamma was," muses Porfiry Vladimirych. "She
knew how to be exacting and how to set one at ease--that is why people
served her so willingly. Still she was not without sins. Oh, yes, she
had plenty of them."

No sooner does Yudushka think of Arina Petrovna than she appears before
him in person, coming straight from the grave.

"I don't know, my friend, I don't know what fault you have to find with
me," she says dejectedly, "it seems to me that I----"

"I know, I know," Yudushka cuts her short unceremoniously. "Let me be
frank and thrash out the matter with you. For instance, why did you not
stop Aunt Varvara Mikhailovna that time?"

"But how in the world could I stop her? She was of age, and she had the
full right to dispose of herself."

"Oh, no, permit me, mother dear. What sort of a husband had she? An old
drunkard, not much of a man, I should say. Nevertheless, they had four
children. Where did they come from, I'm asking you?"

"But how strangely you speak, my friend. As if I were the cause of it
all."

"Cause or no cause, you could have influenced her. You ought to have
treated her kindly, she would have been shamed by you. But you did the
contrary. You kept on scolding her and calling her shameless, and you
suspected almost every man in the neighborhood of being her lover. Of
course, she kicked up the dust. It's a pity. The Goryushkino estate
would have been ours now."

"You cannot forget that Goryushkino," says Arina Petrovna, evidently
brought to a standstill.

"What do I care for Goryushkino? I don't need anything. If I have
enough to buy a church candle and some oil for the image lamp, I am
satisfied. But what about justice, dear mamma, justice? Yes, mother
dear, I would be glad to hold my tongue, but I cannot help being frank
with you. There's a sin on your conscience, a great sin, indeed."

Arina Petrovna does not answer, and it is impossible to tell whether
she is dejected or merely perplexed.

"Another thing," Yudushka goes on, evidently reveling in mother dear's
embarrassment. "Why did you buy a house for brother Stepan?"

"I had to, my friend. I had to give him some share," says Arina
Petrovna, trying to defend herself.

"And he squandered it away, of course. As if you did not know him! You
knew he was a loafer, a disrespectful, foul-mouthed scamp. And to think
that you wanted to give him the Vologda village, too. A neat little
estate with a nice little forest and a tiny lake, lying like a shelled
egg--Christ be with it! It is well that I happened to be around and
kept you from taking that imprudent step. Ah, mamma dear, mamma dear,
how could you?"

"But he was a son of mine, you understand? A son!"

"I know, I understand very well. And still, I repeat, you ought not
to have done it. You paid twelve thousand for the house--where is the
money? And Goryushkino is worth at least fifteen thousand. So the loss
comes to quite a sum."

"Well, that will do, that will do. Don't be angry with me, please
don't!"

"I am not angry, dearest mother, I am only upholding the cause of
justice. What's true is true--and I loathe falsehood. I was born with
truth, have lived with truth, and with truth I shall die. God loves
truth and He would have us, too, love it. Take the case of Pogorelka,
for instance. I shall always say you invested too much money in it."

"But I myself lived there."

Yudushka clearly reads "You silly Bloodsucker!" on his mother's face;
but he makes believe he does not see.

"Well, yes, you lived there--still--the image-case is in Pogorelka.
Whose is it, I'd like to know. And the pony and the tea-caddy. I saw
that tea-caddy at Golovliovo with my own eyes, when papa was still
alive. What a beautiful little box!"

"Well, but----"

"No, dearest mother, let me speak. Of course it looks like a trifling
matter, but a ruble here, half a ruble there, come to quite a sum in
the end. Let me use exact figures and make it clear to you. Figures
are holy, they never lie."

Porfiry Vladimirych runs over to the table with the intention of
finally determining the exact amount of loss that his mother dear had
caused him to sustain. He manipulates the counting-board, covers sheets
of paper with rows of figures, arms himself to convict Arina Petrovna.
But fortunately for her his wavering thoughts cannot remain fixed on
one subject for a long time. Unnoticed by himself a new thought enters
his mind and, as if by magic, gives an entirely different trend to his
ideas. The image of his mother, a minute ago so clear before his eyes,
suddenly drops away. He forgets her, his notions become confused, other
notions enter his mind.

Porfiry Vladimirych has long had the intention of figuring out what his
crops could bring him in. The opportune moment is here. He knows the
peasant is always in want, is always on the lookout to borrow provender
and always pays his debts with interest. He knows also that the peasant
is especially generous with his work, which "costs him nothing," and
is not considered as possessing any value in settling accounts. There
are many needy people in Russia, oh, how many! There are many people
who do not know what the next day will bring them, who see nothing but
despair and emptiness wherever they turn their weary eyes, and who
hear everywhere only one clamor: "Pay your debt! Pay your debt!" It is
around these shiftless, utterly destitute men that Yudushka weaves his
net, with a delight passing sometimes into an orgy.

It is April, and the peasant as usual has nothing to eat. "You have
gobbled up all your crops, my dear fellows," Porfiry Vladimirych muses.
"All winter you feasted, and in spring your stomach is shrivelled from
hunger." He has just settled the accounts of last year's crops. The
threshing was completed in February, the grain was in the granaries in
March, and the amount was recorded in the numerous books the other day.
Yudushka stands at the window and waits. On the bridge afar off the
peasant Foka appears in his cart. At the bend of the road leading to
Golovliovo he shakes the reins rather hastily, and for want of a whip
hits his battered jade with his fist.

"He's heading here," whispers Yudushka. "Look at the horse. A wonder it
can drag its feet. But if you had fed it well a month or two, it would
become quite a horse. You might get twenty-five rubles for it, or even
as much as thirty."

Meanwhile Foka drives up to the servants' house. He ties the animal to
the hedge, throws it a handful of hay, and a minute later stands in the
maids' quarters, shifting from one foot to another. It is in the maids'
quarters that Porfiry Vladimirych usually receives such visitors.

"Well, friend, how are things going?"

"Please sir, what I need is some corn."

"How's that? Are you through with your own? What a pity! If you drank
less vodka, and worked more, and prayed to God, the soil would feel it.
Where one grain grows now, two grains would grow. Then there would be
no need for you to borrow."

Foka smiles vaguely, instead of replying.

"You think if God is far from us, He does not see?" Porfiry Vladimirych
goes on moralizing. "God is here and there and everywhere, he is with
us while we are talking here. He sees everything and hears everything,
he only pretends not to see things. 'Let my creatures live after
their own way, and we shall see whether they will remember me.' And we
sinners take advantage of that, and instead of buying a candle for God
from our meager means, we keep on going to the public-house. That's why
God gives us no corn. Am I not right, friend?"

"You are quite right, sir. There's no denying it."

"Well, you see, you understand it now. And why is it that you
understand it? Because the Lord withdrew His mercy from you. If you
had had an abundant crop of corn, you would carry on again, but since
God----"

"Right, sir, and if----"

"Wait a minute. Let me say a word. The Lord recalls Himself to those
who forgot Him. That is always the case. And we must not grumble over
it, but understand that God does it for our good. Were we to remember
God, He would never forget us. He would grant us everything, corn and
oats and potatoes--more than we need. And He would take care of our
animals. Look at your horse. It is skin and bones. And if you have
chickens, He would keep them in condition, too."

"You are quite right, sir."

"Man's first duty is to honor God, man's second duty is to honor
his superiors, those who have been distinguished by the czars
themselves--the gentry, for instance."

"It seems to me, sir, that I----"

"That's just it, 'it seems to me.' But give a little thought to the
matter, and you will find out that it's all different. Now when you
have come to borrow corn you are very respectful and bland. But two
years ago, you remember, when I needed harvesters and came to you
peasants to ask for help, what did you answer? 'We have to harvest
ourselves,' you said. 'It is not the way it used to be,' you said,
'when we worked for the landlords. Now we are free!' Free, and no corn!"

Yudushka looks at Foka, but Foka does not stir.

"You are very proud, that's why you have no luck. Take me, for example.
The Lord has blessed me, and the Czar has distinguished me. But I am
not proud. How can I be? What am I but a worm, a moth, a nothing. God
took and blessed me for my humility. He loaded me with favors, and put
it into the Czar's mind to favor me, too."

"Porfiry Vladimirych, I think that under serfdom we were far better
off," Foka remarks, playing the flatterer.

"Yes, brother, those were fine days for you peasants. You had plenty of
everything, corn and hay and potatoes. But why recall the old times? I
am not rancorous. I have long forgotten about the harvesters. I only
mentioned them in passing. Let me see--did you say you needed corn?"

"Yes, I did, sir."

"You have come to buy some, have you?"

"How can I? I should like to borrow some until the new corn comes."

"My, my! Corn is not to be had for money nowadays. I really don't know
what to do with you."

Porfiry Vladimirych ponders for a while, as if really perplexed.

"I can lend you some corn, my friend," he finally says. "I have none
for sale, for I loathe to traffic in God's gifts. But I will gladly
lend you some corn. To-day I'll lend to you, to-morrow you'll lend to
me. To-day I have plenty. Take some, help yourself. You want a measure
of corn? Take a measure. You want half a measure? Take half a measure.
Tomorrow may find me knocking at your window saying, 'Dear Foka, lend
me half a measure of corn, I have nothing to eat.'"

"Oh, sir, will you come to me?"

"I shall not. That was merely an example. The world has seen greater
reverses. There was Napoleon, about whom the newspapers have written so
much. That's how it is, brother. So how much corn do you want?"

"A measure, if you please."

"Well, I can let you have a measure. Only let me warn you, corn is
tremendously dear nowadays. This is what we are going to do: I shall
give you six chetveriks, and in eight months you will deliver a measure
to me. I don't take any interest, but an additional chetverik or
two----"

Yudushka's offer makes Foka gasp. For some time he says nothing, only
shrugs his shoulders. "Won't that be a bit too much, sir?" he says at
last, evidently alarmed.

"If it's too much, go to others. You see, my friend, I am not forcing
you, I am only making you an offer in a friendly way. I didn't send for
you, did I? You came here yourself. You came to ask for something and
that's my answer. Isn't it so, friend?"

"Yes, quite so, but don't you think it's too much interest?"

"Ah, ah, ah! And I thought you were a just, respectable peasant. Well,
you will say to me, what am I going to live on? How will I meet my
expenses? Do you know what expenses I have? My dear man, there is no
end to them. I've got to pay here, and meet my obligations there, and
produce cash in a third place. I've got to satisfy every one. All are
after Porfiry Vladimirych, all ask something of him, and I've got to
get along with them as best I can. And then again, if I sold the corn
to the dealer, I should get money at once. And money, my friend, is
a sacred thing. With money I can buy securities, put them in a safe
place, and draw interest. No worry, you know, of any kind, no trouble
at all. Just clip the coupon and get your money. But with the corn
you've got to go carefully about it, and look after it, and all that.
A lot of it will dry up, and be wasted, and the mice will eat it up.
No, brother, money is the best thing--nothing like it! It would be high
time for me to become sensible and turn everything into money and leave
you folks."

"Oh, Porfiry Vladimirych, stay with us."

"Well, my dear man, I should like to, but I can't stand it any longer.
If I had the strength of my youth, of course I would stay with you
and keep at it. But no, it's time to rest. I will go to the Trinity
Monastery, I will find shelter under the wing of the saints, and not a
soul will hear from me. And how good I'll feel! All will be peaceful
and quiet and honest; no noise, no quarrels--like in Heaven."

In a word, in spite of all of Foka's protestations, Porfiry Vladimirych
arranges the bargain to suit himself. But that is not enough. At the
very moment that Foka consents to the terms of the loan, a thought
flashes through Yudushka's mind. A certain Shelepikha meadow appears on
the scene. It doesn't amount to much, hardly a desyatin to mow.

"You see, I am doing you a favor, so you do me one in turn," says
Porfiry Vladimirych. "This is not interest, but just a favor. God does
favors to us all, and we've got to do likewise to one another. You will
mow this desyatin in no time, and I'll be much obliged to you. You see,
brother, I am a plain man. You'll do me a ruble's worth of service, and
I----"

Porfiry Vladimirych rises, faces the church, and makes the sign of the
cross to show that the transaction is at an end. Foka also rises and
makes the sign of the cross.

Foka has disappeared. Porfiry Vladimirych produces a sheet of paper,
arms himself with the counting-board, and the beads begin jumping
fast under his skilful fingers. Little by little an orgy of numbers
commences. The whole world becomes enwrapped in mist. With feverish
haste Yudushka passes from the paper to the counting-board and from the
counting-board to the paper. The rows of figures keep growing larger
and larger.