It had never occurred to Arina Petrovna that there might come a time
when she would become "one mouth too many." Now that moment had stolen
upon her just when for the first time in her life her physical and
moral strength was undermined. Such moments always arrive suddenly.
Though one may long have been on the verge of breaking down, one may
still hold out and stave off the end, till suddenly the last blow
strikes from a quarter least expected. To be aware of its approach and
dodge it, is difficult. One has to resign oneself without complaint,
for it is the very blow that in an instant shatters one who till
recently has been hale and healthy.

When Arina Petrovna took up her abode in Dubrovino, after having broken
with Yudushka, she had labored under great difficulties. But then, at
least, she had known that Pavel Vladimirych, though looking askance at
her intrusion, was still a well-to-do man to whom another morsel meant
little. Now things were very different. She stood at the head of a
household that counted every crumb. And she knew the value of crumbs,
having spent all her life in the country in constant intercourse with
peasants and having assimilated the peasant's notions of the harm a
"superfluous mouth" does to a house in which stores are already scanty.

Nevertheless, in the first days after the removal to Pogorelka, she
still maintained her usual attitude, busied herself with putting things
in shape in the new place, and exercised her former clarity of judgment
in household management. But the affairs of the estate were troublesome
and petty, and demanded her constant personal supervision; and though
on first thought she did not see much sense in keeping accurate
accounts in a place where farthings are put together to make up kopek
pieces and these in turn to make ten-kopek pieces, she was soon forced
to admit that she had been wrong in this. To be sure, there really was
no sense in keeping careful accounts; but the point was, she no longer
possessed her former industry and strength. Then, too, it was autumn,
the busiest time of reckoning up accounts and taking inventories, and
the incessant bad weather imposed inevitable limits to Arina Petrovna's
energy. Ailments of old age came upon her and prevented her from
leaving the house. The long dreary fall evenings set in and doomed her
to enforced idleness. The old woman was all upset and exerted herself
to the utmost, but succeeded in accomplishing nothing.

Another thing. She could not help noticing that something queer was
coming over the orphans. They suddenly became dull and dispirited
and were agitated by some vague plans for the future, plans in which
notions of work were interspersed with notions of pleasures of the most
innocent kind, of course--reminiscences of the boarding-school where
they had been brought up, mingled with stray notions about men of toil,
which they retained from their fragmentary reading, and timid hopes of
clutching at some thread through their boarding-school connections,
and so entering the bright kingdom of human life. One tormenting hope
stood out definitely from the other vague longings, to leave hateful
Pogorelka at whatever costs.

And at length one fine day Anninka and Lubinka actually announced to
grandma that they simply could not stay at Pogorelka a moment longer;
they led a beastly life there, met nobody but the priest, and he, when
he met them, felt it incumbent upon him to tell of the virgins who had
extinguished their lamps. It wasn't right, it wasn't fair.

The girls spoke sharply, afraid of their grandmother and simulating
courage in order to overcome the anger and resistance they expected.
But to their surprise Arina Petrovna listened without anger, without
even a disposition toward the useless sermonizing that impotent old age
is so given to.

Alas, she was no longer that dominating woman who used to say so
confidently: "I am going to Khotkov and will take the little orphans
with me." The change was due, not to senile impotence alone, but also
to an acquired sense of something better and truer. The last buffets
of fortune had not only tamed Arina Petrovna; they had also lighted up
some corners of her mental horizon into which her thoughts evidently
had never before entered. Now, she knew, there were certain forces
in the human being that can remain dormant a long while, but once
awakened, they carry one irresistibly on to the glimmering ray of life,
that cheering ray for whose appearance one's eyes have been yearning
so long amidst the hopeless darkness of the present. Once realizing
the legitimacy of such a striving, she was powerless to oppose it. It
is true, she tried to dissuade her granddaughters from their purpose,
but feebly, without conviction. She was uneasy about the future in
store for them; all the more so since she herself had no connections in
so-called "society." Yet she felt that the parting with the girls was
a proper and inevitable thing. What would become of them? frequently
pressed on her mind; but she was now fully aware that neither this
question nor others more terrible would restrain one who was struggling
for release from captivity.

The girls insisted on one thing, on shaking the dust of Pogorelka from
their feet. And finally, after some hesitating and postponing to please
grandmother, they left.

The Pogorelka manor-house was now steeped in a forlorn quiet.
Self-centered as Arina Petrovna was by nature, yet the proximity of
human breath had its calming effect even upon her. For the first time,
perhaps, she felt that something had torn itself away from her being,
and the freedom with which she herself was now confronted was so
boundless that all she saw was empty space. To hide the void from her
eyes, she ordered the state-rooms and the attic where the orphans had
lived to be nailed up.

"Incidentally, there will be less firewood burned," she said to herself.

She retained only two rooms, in one of which a large ikon case with
images was stowed away. The other was a combined bedroom, study
and dining-room. For the sake of economy she dismissed her retinue
of servants, retaining only her housekeeper Afimyushka, an old,
broken-down woman, and Markovna, one-eyed, the soldier's wife, who did
the cooking and washing.

All these precautions, however, were of little help. The sensation
of emptiness was not slow to penetrate into the two rooms that were
meant to be guarded from it. Helpless solitude and dreary idleness
were the two enemies Arina Petrovna now confronted. And she was to be
bound to these two enemies the rest of her days. Physical and mental
disintegration were not slow to follow in the wake of loneliness
and idleness, and the less the resistance, the crueller, the more
destructive its work.

Days dragged on in the oppressive monotony peculiar to rural life when
there are no comforts or there is no executive work to be done, and
there is no material for mental occupation. In addition to the external
causes at work to take the management of household affairs away from
her, was an inner aversion that Arina Petrovna now felt to the petty
cares and bustle coming at the sunset of her life. Perhaps she would
have overcome her repugnance had she had an aim in view to justify her
efforts, but that very aim was wanting. Everybody was sick and weary
of her, and she was sick and weary of everybody and everything. Her
feverish activity of old suddenly yielded to idleness, and idleness
little by little corrupted her will and induced propensities of which
Arina Petrovna could never have dreamed only a few months ago.

The strong, reserved woman, whom no one would have thought of calling
old, turned into a wreck of her former self. There was neither past
nor future for her, but only the immediate moment to live through.
The greater part of the day she dozed, sitting in an easy-chair by
the table, on which ill-smelling cards were arranged. She would doze
for hours on end. Then her body would shudder convulsively, she would
wake up, look out of the window, and for a long time stare into the
distance, without a single conscious thought.

Pogorelka was a dreary manor-house. It stood all alone, without orchard
or shade, or the least indication of comfort. There was not even a
flower garden in front of the house. It was a one-story structure,
squat, weather-beaten, all black with age. Back of it were the many
out-buildings, also half worn-out, and all around was one vast stretch
of fields--fields without end. Not even the glimpse of forest anywhere
on the horizon. But from her very childhood Arina Petrovna had hardly
ever left the country, and this monotonous landscape did not seem
dreary to her. It even appealed to her heart and awakened remnants of
emotion still glowing within her. The best part of her being lived in
these naked fields, and her gaze sought them instinctively.

She stared at the expanse of fields; she stared at the drenched hamlets
making black specks on the landscape; she stared at the white churches
of the rural parishes; she stared at the motley spots that the cloud
shadows formed on the plains; she stared at the peasant unknown to her
who walked along the ploughed furrows, and she thought him slow and
stiff. While staring, she had no conscious thoughts, or, rather, her
thoughts were so fragmentary and disconnected that they could not stay
with any one thing for even a short time. She just gazed, gazed till
senile slumber again hummed dully in her ears, and the fields, the
churches, the hamlets and the peasant in the distance became wrapped in
mist.

At times, apparently, she recollected something; but the memories of
the past came incoherently, in fragments. Her attention could not
concentrate on one point. It jumped from one remote memory to another.
Yet sometimes she would be struck by something singular, not joy--her
past was very scant in joys--but some grievance, some abuse, bitter
and unbearable. Then sudden anger would flare up, anguish would creep
into her heart, and tears come to her eyes. She would weep grievously,
painfully, the weeping of piteous old age, when tears flow as if under
the load of a nightmare. But even while her tears were flowing, her
mind unconsciously continued to work in its usual way, and her thoughts
drifted imperceptibly away from the cause of her mood, so that in a few
minutes the old woman was wondering what had been the matter with her.

Altogether, she lived as if not participating in life personally, but
solely because in those ruins there were still left a few odds and ends
which had to be collected, recorded, and accounted for. While these
odds and ends were present, life went its way compelling the ruin to
perform all the external functions necessary to keep that half-asleep
existence from crumbling to dust.

But if the days passed in unconscious slumber, the nights were sheer
torment. At night Arina Petrovna was _afraid;_ she was afraid of
thieves, of ghosts, of devils, of all that was the product of her
education and life. And the defenses of the place were very poor, for
beside the two tottering women domestics Pogorelka had a night-watch in
the person of the lame little peasant Fedoseyushka, who for two rubles
a month came from the village to guard the manor-house, and usually
slept in the vestibule, coming out at the appointed hours to strike the
steel plate. In the cattle-yard, it is true, there lived a few farm
hands, men and women, but the cattle house was about fifty yards away
and it was not easy to summon any one from there.

There is something exceedingly dreary and oppressive in a sleepless
night in the country. At nine, or at latest ten o'clock, life ceases.
A weird stillness sets in that is full of terrors. There is nothing to
do, and it is a waste to burn candles. Willy-nilly one must go to bed.
As soon as the samovar was removed from the table Afimyushka, from an
old habit acquired during serfdom, spread a felt blanket in front of
the door leading to the mistress's bedroom, scratched her head, yawned,
flopped down on the floor, and fell dead asleep. Markovna always
fumbled in the maids' room a trifle longer, muttering something to
herself as if scolding somebody. But at last she, too, got quiet, and a
moment later you could hear her snoring and raving intermittently. The
watchman banged on the plate several times to announce his presence,
then kept quiet for a long time. Arina Petrovna, sitting in front of a
snuffy tallow candle, tried to stave off sleep by playing "patience,"
but scarcely did she have the cards arranged when she fell into a doze.

"It is as easy as not for a fire to start while one is asleep," she
would say to herself, and decide to go to bed. But no sooner did she
sink into the down pillows than another trouble set in. Her sleepiness,
so inviting and insistent all evening long, now left her completely.
The room was a close one at the best, and now, from the open flue the
heat came thick, and the down pillows were insufferable. Arina Petrovna
tossed restlessly. She wanted to call someone, but knew no one would
come in answer to her summons. A mysterious quiet reigned all around,
a quiet in which the delicate ear could distinguish a multitude of
sounds. Now something crackled somewhere, now a whining was audible,
now it seemed as if somebody were walking through the corridor, now a
puff of wind swept through the room and even touched her face. The ikon
lamp burned in front of an image, and the light gave the objects in the
room a kind of elusiveness, as if they were not actual things, but only
the contours of things. Another bit of light strayed from the open door
of the adjacent room, where four or five ikon lamps were burning before
the image case. A mouse squeaked behind the wall paper. "Sh-sh-sh,
you nasty thing," said Arina Petrovna, and all was silent again. And
shadows again, whisperings again coming from no one knew where. The
greater part of the night passed in that half-awake senile slumber.
Real sleep did not set in and do its work until nearly morning. By
six o'clock Arina Petrovna was already on her feet, tired out after a
sleepless night.

Other things to add to the misery of this miserable existence of
Arina Petrovna's were the poor food she ate and the discomfort of her
home. She ate little and used poor food, wishing, probably, to make
up for the loss caused by insufficient supervision. And the Pogorelka
manor-house was dilapidated and damp. The room into which Arina
Petrovna locked herself was never ventilated and remained without
cleaning for weeks on end. In this complete helplessness and the
absence of all comfort and care, decrepitude began slowly to set in.
But her desire to live grew stronger, or, rather, her desire for "a
dainty bit" asserted itself. With this came coupled a total absence of
the thought of death. Previously, she had been afraid of death; now
she seemed to have quite forgotten about it. And with ideals of life
differing but little from a peasant's, her conception of a "comfortable
life" was of rather a base kind. Everything she had formerly denied
herself, dainties, rest, association with wide-awake people, now forced
itself upon her in an insistent craving. All the propensities of a
regular sponger and hanger-on, idle talk, subservience for the sake of
a prospective gift, gluttony, grew in her with astounding rapidity.
Like the servants, she fed on cabbage-soup and cured bacon of doubtful
quality, and at the same time dreamed of the stores of provisions at
Golovliovo, of the German carps that swarmed in the Dubrovino ponds,
of the mushrooms that filled the Golovliovo woods, of the fowl that
fattened in the Golovliovo poultry-yard.

"Some soup with giblets, or some garden-cress in cream would not be a
bad thing," would cross her mind so vividly that her mouth watered. At
night when she tossed about rigid with fright at the least rustling,
she would think: "Yes, at Golovliovo the locks are secure and the
watchmen reliable. They keep banging on the steel plates all the time,
and you can sleep in perfect safety." During the day, from sheer lack
of human companionship, she was compelled to be silent for hours, and
during these spells of compulsory taciturnity, she could not help
thinking: "At Golovliovo there are lots of people. There you can talk
your troubles away." In fact, Golovliovo kept constantly recurring to
her mind, and the reminiscences of her former estate became a radiant
spot in which "comfortable living" concentrated itself.

The more frequently the vision of Golovliovo came back to her mind,
the stronger became her will to live again, and the farther the deadly
affronts she had recently sustained sank into oblivion. The Russian
woman, by the very nature of her life and bringing-up, too quickly
acquiesces in the lot of a hanger-on. Even Arina Petrovna did not
escape that fate, though her past, it would seem, should have tended
to warn and guard her against such a yoke. Had she not made a mistake
"at that time," had she not portioned out her estate to her sons,
had she not trusted Yudushka, she would to this very day have been a
harsh, exacting old woman, with everybody under her thumb. But since
the mistake was fatal, the transition from a testy, arbitrary mistress
to an obedient, obsequious parasite was only a matter of time. As long
as she still retained remnants of former vigor, the change was not
evident, but as soon as she realized that she was irrevocably doomed to
helplessness and solitude, all the pusillanimous propensities began to
make their way into her soul, and her will, already weakened, became
completely shattered. Yudushka, who used to be received most coldly
when he visited Pogorelka, suddenly ceased to be hateful to her. The
old injuries were somehow forgotten, and Arina Petrovna was the first
to court intimacy.

It began with begging. Messengers from Pogorelka would come to
Yudushka, at first rarely, but then with increasing frequency. Now
there had been a poor crop of garden-cress at Pogorelka, now the rains
had ruined the gherkins, now the turkey-poults had died--there's
freedom for you! And then it came to: "Would you mind, my dear friend,
ordering some German carps caught in Dubrovino? My late son Pavel never
refused them to me." Yudushka frowned, but thought it best not to show
open displeasure. The carps were an item, to be sure, but he was filled
with terror at the thought that his mother might put her curse upon
him. He well remembered her once saying: "I will come to Golovliovo,
order the church opened, call in the priest and shout: 'I curse you!'"
It was the recollection of this that held him back from many dastardly
acts that quite accorded with his nature. But in fulfilling the wish
of his "mother dear" he did not omit to hint casually to the people
around him that God had ordained that every man bear his cross, and
that He did so not without divine purpose, for he who bears not his
cross wanders from the righteous path and becomes corrupted. To his
mother he wrote: "I am sending you some gherkins, mother dear, as many
as my resources allow. As to the turkeys, I am sorry to inform you that
besides those left for breeding, there remain only turkey-cocks, which
in view of their size and the limited needs of your table are quite
useless to you. And will it not be your pleasure to let me welcome you
to Golovliovo and share my paltry viands with you? Then we can have one
of those idlers (idlers, indeed, for my cook Matvey caponizes them most
skilfully) roasted, and you and I, my dearest friend, shall feast on
him to our heart's content."

From that day Arina Petrovna became a frequent guest at Golovliovo.
Assisted by Yudushka she tasted of turkeys and ducks; she slept her
fill both by night and by day, and after dinner she eased her heart
with copious small talk, in which Yudushka was proficient by nature,
she proficient because of old age. Her visits were not discontinued
even when it reached her ears that Yudushka, weary of solitude, had
taken in a damsel named Yevpraksia, from among the clergy, as his
housekeeper. On the contrary, she made off right for Golovliovo and
before alighting from the carriage called to Yudushka with childish
impatience: "Well, well, you old sinner, let's see your queen, let's
see your queen." That entire day she spent most pleasurably, because
Yevpraksia herself waited upon her at table and made her bed after
dinner, and because in the evening she played fool with Yudushka and
his queen.

Yudushka himself was pleased with this dénouement, and in token of
filial gratitude ordered a pound of caviar, among other things, to be
put into Arina Petrovna's carriage as she was about to depart. That was
the highest token of esteem, for caviar is not a home product; one has
to buy it. The courtesy so touched the old woman that she could refrain
no longer and said: "Well, I do thank you for this. And God, too, will
love you, because you cherish and sustain your mother in her old age.
Now, when I get back to Pogorelka, I shall not be bored any more. I
always did like caviar. Well, thanks to you, I'll have a dainty morsel
now."