Arina Petrovna was already at the table, and Yevpraksia was busy
arranging the tea things. The old woman was silent and thoughtful, and
looked as if she were ashamed of Petenka. In the customary way Yudushka
kissed her hand, and she made the sign of the cross over him. Then came
the usual questions, whether everybody felt well, and had had a good
night's rest, followed by the customary monosyllabic answers. Petenka's
asking Arina Petrovna for money and awakening the memory of the "curse"
had put her into a state of peculiar uneasiness. She was pursued by the
thought, "What if I threaten him with my curse?" When she had heard
that explanations in the study had begun, she had turned to Yevpraksia
with the request:

"Suppose, my dear, you go to the door quietly and listen to what they
say."

Yevpraksia went to eavesdrop, but was so stupid she could understand
nothing.

"Oh, they're just having a chat," she explained upon her return.

Then Arina Petrovna could not hold out any longer and went to the
dining-room, where the samovar had already been brought in. But the
interview was nearing its end, and all she noted was that Petenka's
voice was loud and angry, and Porfiry Vladimirych's replies were given
in a nagging voice.

"He's nagging him, that just it, nagging!" ran in her head. "I remember
he used to nag that way, and how is it I did not understand him then?"

At last, father and son appeared in the dining-room. Petenka's face
was red and he was breathing heavily. His eyes were staring widely,
his hair was disheveled, his forehead was covered with beads of
perspiration. Yudushka, on the contrary, entered pale and cross.
He wanted to appear indifferent but, in spite of all his efforts,
his lower lip trembled. He could hardly utter the customary morning
greetings to his mother dear.

All took their places at the table. Petenka seated himself at some
distance, leaned against the back of his chair, crossed his legs,
lighted a cigarette, and looked at his father ironically.

"You see, mother, the storm has abated," Yudushka began. "Yesterday
there was such an uproar, but God only had to will it, and here we have
a nice, bright, quiet day. Am I right, mother dear?"

"I don't know. I haven't been out to-day."

"By the way, we are going to see our dear guest off," continued
Yudushka. "I rose early this morning, looked out of the window--it
was still and quiet outdoors, as if God's angel had flown by and in a
moment allayed the riot with his wings."

But no one answered Yudushka's kindly words. Yevpraksia sipped her tea
from the saucer, blowing and puffing. Arina Petrovna looked into her
cup and was silent. Petenka, swaying in his chair, continued to eye
his father with an ironical, defiant air, as if he had to exert great
efforts to keep from bursting out laughing.

"Even if Petenka does not ride fast, he will reach the railway station
toward night," Porfiry Vladimirych resumed. "Our horses are not
overworked. They will feed for a couple of hours at Muravyevo, and they
will get him to the place in a jiffy. Ah, Petka, you are a bad boy!
Suppose you stay with us a while longer--really. We would enjoy your
company, and you would improve greatly in a week."

But Petenka continued to sway in his chair and eye his father.

"Why do you stare at me?" Yudushka flared up at last. "Do you see
pictures on me?"

"I'm just looking at you waiting for what's coming next."

"No use waiting, my son. It will be as I said. I will not change my
mind."

A minute of silence followed, after which a whisper could be distinctly
heard.

"Yudushka!"

Porfiry Vladimirych undoubtedly heard it, he even turned pale, but he
pretended the exclamation did not concern him.

"Ah, my dear little children," he said. "I should like to caress and
fondle you, but it seems it can't be done--ill luck! You run away from
your parents, you've got bosom friends who are dearer to you than
father and mother. Well, it can't be helped. One ponders a bit over it,
then resigns oneself. You are young folk, and youth, of course, prefers
the company of youth to that of an old grouch. So, I resign myself and
don't complain. I only pray to Our Father in Heaven, 'Do Thy will, oh
Lord!'"

"Murderer!" Petenka whispered, but this time so distinctly that Arina
Petrovna looked at him in fright. Something passed before her eyes. It
looked like the shadow of Simple Simon.

"Whom do you mean?" asked Yudushka, trembling with excitement.

"Oh, just an acquaintance of mine."

"I see. Well, you'd better make that clear. Lord knows what's in your
head. Maybe it is one of us that you style so."

Everybody became silent. The glasses of tea remained untouched.
Yudushka leaned against the back of his chair, swaying nervously.
Petenka, seeing that all hope was gone, had a sensation of deadly
anguish, under the influence of which he was ready to go to any
lengths. But father and son looked at each other with an indescribable
smile. Hardened though Porfiry Vladimirych was, the minute was nearing
when he would be unable to control himself.

"You'd better go, while the going's good," he burst out, finally. "You
better had."

"I'm going."

"Then why wait? I see you're trying to pick a quarrel, and I don't
want to quarrel with anybody. We live here quietly and in good order,
without disputes. Your old grandmother is here. You ought to have
regard for her at least. Well, tell us why you came here?"

"I told you why."

"If it's only for that, you are wasting your efforts. Go at once, my
son. Hey, who's there? Have the horses ready for the young master. And
some fried chicken, and caviar, and other things, eggs, I suppose. Wrap
them up well in paper. You'll take a bite at the station, my son, while
they feed the horses. Godspeed!"

"No, I am not going yet. I'm going to church first to have a memorial
service performed for the murdered servant of God, Vladimir."

"That is, for the suicide."

"No, for the murdered."

Father and son stared at each other. It looked as if in a moment both
would jump up. But Yudushka made a superhuman effort and, turning his
chair, faced the table again.

"Wonderful!" he said in a strained voice. "Wonderful!"

"Yes, for the murdered!" Petenka persisted brutally.

"Who murdered him?" Yudushka asked with curiosity, still hoping,
apparently, that his son would come to his senses.

But Petenka, unperturbed, whipped out:

"You!"

"I?"

Porfiry Vladimirych was astounded. It was a few moments before he came
to himself. He rose hastily from his seat, faced the ikon and began to
pray.

"You, you, you!" Petenka repeated.

"Well, now! Thank God, I feel better after praying," said Yudushka,
seating himself at table again. "Just a minute, though. I, as your
father, should not take you up on your talk, but we'll pursue the
matter this time. Then you mean to say that I killed Volodenka?"

"Yes, you did."

"And I beg leave to differ. I consider he shot himself. At that time
I was at Golovliovo and in St. Petersburg. So what could I have to do
with it? How could I kill him when he was seven hundred versts away?"

"As if you don't understand!"

"I don't understand, by the Lord, I don't!"

"And who left Volodya without a penny? Who discontinued his allowances?
Who?"

"Stuff and nonsense! Why did he marry against his father's will?"

"But you gave him your permission."

"Who? I? What are you talking about? I never did anything of the kind.
Nev-v-v-er!"

"Oh, of course, you acted as you always do. Everyone of your words has
ten meanings. Go, guess the right one."

"I never gave my permission. He wrote to me, 'Papa, I want to marry
Lida,' you understand, 'I want to,' not 'I beg your permission.' Well,
I answered him, 'If you want to marry, you can marry. I cannot stand in
your way.' That's all there was to it."

"That's all there was to it," Petenka said jeeringly. "And wasn't that
giving your permission?"

"That's exactly what it wasn't. What did I say? I said, 'I cannot stand
in your way.' That's all. But whether I give my permission or not, is
a different question. He did not ask my permission, he simply wrote,
'Papa, I want to marry Lida.' Well, and as to permission he kept mum.
You want to marry. Well, my friend, may God be with you, marry Lida or
Fida, I cannot stand in your way!"

"But you could leave him without a crust of bread. So why didn't you
write this way, 'I do not approve of your intention, and therefore,
though I will not hinder you, I warn you that you can not longer rely
on financial aid from me.' That, at least, would have been clear."

"No, I shall never permit myself to do such things, to make threats
against a grown son--never! I have a rule never to be in anybody's way.
If you want to marry--marry! Well, and as to consequences--I am sorry.
It was your business to foresee them yourself. That's why God gave you
reason. And as to me, brother, I don't like to thrust myself into other
people's affairs. I not only keep from meddling myself, but I don't
invite others to meddle in my affairs, I don't invite it, I don't, I
don't, I even forbid it! Do you hear me, you wicked, disrespectful son,
I f-o-r-b-i-d it!"

"You may forbid it, if you like, but you can't muzzle everybody."

"If at least he had repented! And if at least he had realized that he
offended his father! Well, you committed a folly--say you are sorry.
Ask forgiveness! 'Forgive me, dear papa, for the mortification I caused
you.' But he wouldn't!"

"But he did write to you. He made it clear to you that he had nothing
to live on, that he could not endure it any longer."

"That's not the kind of thing to write to a father. From a father one
asks pardon, that's all."

"He did so. He was so tortured that he begged forgiveness, too. He did
everything, he did."

"And even if he did, he was wrong. You ask forgiveness once, you see
your father does not forgive you, you ask again!"

"Oh, you!"

At this Petenka suddenly ceased swaying his chair, turned about, faced
the table and rested both elbows on it.

"And here I, too----" he whispered.

His face gradually became disfigured.

"And here I too----" he repeated, and burst into hysterical sobbing.

"Whose fault----"

But Yudushka had no chance to finish his sermon. At that moment
something quite unexpected took place. During their skirmish the man
had almost forgotten about Arina Petrovna. But she had not remained
an indifferent spectator. On the contrary, you could tell at a glance
that something quite unusual was taking place within her, and that
the moment perhaps had arrived when the ruthless vision of her entire
life appeared before her spiritual eye in a glaring light. Her face
livened up, her eyes widened and glittered, her lips moved as if they
were struggling to utter some word and could not. Suddenly, just at the
moment when Petenka's bitter weeping resounded in the dining-room she
rose heavily from her arm-chair, stretched her arms forward, and a loud
wail broke out from her breast.

"My cu-r-r-se upon you!"