It is the middle of December. The country stretches still and benumbed,
covered with a mantle of snow as far as the eye can reach. The
horses, though pulling empty carts, wade with difficulty through the
snow-drifts that the wind has driven during the night. There is not the
trace of a path to the Golovliovo estate.

Porfiry Vladimirych had grown so unaccustomed to visits that in the
beginning of autumn he barred the front entrance to the house and the
main gateways leading to it, leaving only the servants' entrance and
the side gates for the domestics to communicate with the outer world.

One morning as the clock was striking eleven, Yudushka in his
dressing-gown was standing at the window staring aimlessly before him.
Since early morning he had been walking to and fro in the room, deep
in thought about a certain momentous matter, and ceaselessly counting
imaginary profits. Finally, he became mixed in the ciphering and grew
tired. Both the magnificent orchard in front of the manor and the
village behind it were lost to view in the snow. After yesterday's
blizzard the air was frosty, and the snow shimmered and sparkled in the
sun, so that Porfiry Vladimirych had to blink. The court was silent and
deserted. There was not the least movement, either in the servants'
quarters or near the cattle yard. Even the village itself was so silent
that it seemed as if death had suddenly stolen upon the people. The
only thing that attracted Yudushka's attention was a curl of thin smoke
floating upward from the priest's house.

"Eleven o'clock, and the parson's wife has not yet finished cooking,"
he thinks. "Those black coats are always gorging."

With this as a point of departure, his mind wandered on. Was it a
weekday or a holiday, a fast day or not, and what can the parson's
wife be cooking? But suddenly his attention was diverted. On the hill
at the very beginning of the road from the village of Pogorelka a
black dot appeared, approached gradually and grew larger and larger.
Porfiry Vladimirych looked intently. "Who could be coming, a peasant or
somebody else? Who could it be but a peasant? Yes, a peasant! What was
he coming for? If for wood, why, then, the Naglovka forest was on the
other side of the village. The knave must be intending to steal some
wood. If he was making for the mill, why, then, he ought to have turned
to the right. Perhaps he was coming to fetch the priest. Someone dying,
or, perhaps, already dead? Or maybe a child had been born? Who could it
be? In autumn Nenila walked about pregnant, but it was too early for
her. If it should be a boy, he would get into the census. What was the
population of Naglovka at the last census? But if a girl, she would
not get into the census, and----Still, it is impossible to get along
without the female sex. Fie!"

Yudushka spat and looked at the ikon in the corner, as if seeking its
protection from the Evil One.

It is quite possible that he would have continued wandering in thought
had the black speck been lost to view, but it kept on growing and at
last turned toward the marsh road leading to the church. Then Yudushka
saw quite clearly that it was a small wagon pulled by two horses, one
behind the other. Next it went up the hill, and drove past the church.
"Perhaps it is the bishop," passed through his mind. "That's why they
have not yet finished cooking at the parson's house." Then the vehicle
turned to the right and made straight for the manor-house. Porfiry
Vladimirych instinctively drew his dressing-gown together and stepped
away from the window, as if afraid of being seen by the traveller.

He had guessed correctly. The wagon drove up to the house and stopped
at the side gate. A young woman jumped out of it quickly. She was
dressed out of season in a large cotton-lined greatcoat trimmed with
lamb's fur, more for show than for warmth. She was apparently frozen.
No one appearing to receive her, the stranger hopped over to the maids'
entrance. In a few seconds the outer door in the women's quarters
banged shut, then another door, and another, until all the rooms
adjacent to the maids' entrance were filled with a noise of hurried
footsteps and banging doors.

Porfiry Vladimirych stood at his study door listening intently. It was
so long since he had seen any strangers, and altogether he had become
so unaccustomed to the company of human beings, that he was somewhat
bewildered. Nearly a quarter of an hour passed, the running and the
banging of the doors continued, and yet he was not told who had come.
It was clear that the guest was a relative, who did not doubt her
right to the host's hospitality. But what relatives had he? He tried to
recall them, but his memory was dull. He had had two sons, Volodka and
Petka; he had had a mother, Arina Petrovna--long, long ago! Last autumn
Nadka Galkina, daughter of his late aunt Varvara Mikhailovna, had taken
up her residence at Goryushkino. Could it be she? Why, no. She had
already tried to make her way into the Golovliovo temple, but to no
avail.

"She will not dare to, she will not dare to!" reiterated Yudushka,
burning with indignation at the very thought of her intrusion. "But who
else can it be?"

While he was busy guessing, Yevpraksia approached the door cautiously
and announced:

"The young lady of Pogorelka, Anna Semyonovna, has arrived."

It was indeed Anninka, but changed beyond recognition. She was no
longer the beautiful, lively, buoyant girl with rosy cheeks, full
gray eyes, high breast and heavy, ash-colored tresses massed low on
her head, who had come to Golovliovo shortly after the death of Arina
Petrovna, but a weak, wasted creature with a sunken chest, hollow
cheeks, a hectic face and languid movements--a bent creature, almost
hunch-backed. Even her splendid braids looked miserable, and her eyes,
blazing feverishly, seemed larger than ever in her emaciated face. Her
eyes alone retained something of their former beauty. Yevpraksia stared
long at her as at a stranger, then finally recognized her.

"You?" she cried out, clapping her hands.

"I. Well?"

Anninka laughed quietly, as if to add, "Yes, life has played me a dirty
trick."

"Is uncle well?"

"Uncle? Nothing is the matter with him. He is alive, there is no doubt
about that, but we hardly ever see him."

"What's the matter with him?"

"Just so--it's all because of lonesomeness."

"Don't tell me he has stopped haranguing?"

"He is real quiet now, miss. He used to talk and talk, but suddenly he
became silent. Occasionally we hear him in his study talking to himself
and sometimes even laughing, but as soon as he comes out of the room he
is quiet. People say his late brother, Stepan Vladimirych, had the same
trouble. At first he was gay, then suddenly he became quiet. And you,
madam, are you well?"

Anninka only waved her hand in reply.

"And is your sister well?"

"She has been lying in her grave at the wayside at Krechetovo a month."

"Lord be merciful! At the wayside!"

"Of course, that's how they bury all suicides."

"Goodness! A lady--and to take her own life! How is that?"

"Yes, at first she was a 'lady,' and then she took poison, that's all.
And I, I am a coward, I want to live, and here I have come to you. Not
for long, oh, don't be afraid. I shall die soon, too."

Yevpraksia stared at her, as if she did not understand.

"Why are you looking at me? Am I such a fright? Well, never mind my
looks. However, I'll tell you later--later. Now pay the coachman and
announce me to uncle."

She produced an old pocketbook and took out two yellow bills.

"And here is all my property," she added, pointing to a small trunk.
"Here's everything, both my inheritance and my own acquisitions. I am
cold, Yevpraksia, very cold. I am quite sick, there's not a bone in my
body that doesn't ache, and here as if to spite me, it is so cold. As I
was riding, I thought of only one thing, to get to Golovliovo, and die
there, at least in warmth. I'd like to have some vodka. Have you any?"

"You had better have some tea, madam. The samovar will soon be ready."

"No, I shall have tea later. Now I'd like to have some vodka. However,
don't tell uncle about the vodka yet. It will all come out later."

While they set the table for tea in the dining-room Porfiry Vladimirych
appeared. Now Anninka in her turn was completely surprised at her
uncle's emaciation and wild, faded looks. Porfiry received Anninka in
a strange manner, not coldly, but as if altogether indifferent. He
spoke little, as if under compulsion, like an actor trying to recall
sentences of parts acted in days gone by, and was absent-minded, as
though his mind were absorbed in some grave, urgent business from which
he had been torn away to attend to trifles.

"So you have arrived?" he said. "What will you have, tea, coffee? Order
the servants to fetch it."

In former days, at family meetings, Yudushka always played the
sentimental part. This time it was Anninka who was filled with
emotions, genuine emotions. The claw of sorrow must have sunk deep
into her being, for she threw herself on Porfiry Vladimirych's breast
and embraced him ardently.

"Uncle, I have come to you!" she cried, and burst into tears.

"Well, you are welcome. I have enough rooms. Live here."

"I am sick, uncle, very, very sick."

"If you are sick, you must pray to God! Whenever I am not well, I
always heal myself through prayer."

"I have come to you, uncle, to die."

Porfiry Vladimirych looked at her with questioning eyes, and an almost
imperceptible smile stole over his lips.

"So that is where your acting has brought you?"

"Yes, that is where my acting has brought me. Lubinka is dead and I--I
am alive,"

At the news of Lubinka's death Yudushka piously crossed himself and
whispered a prayer. Anninka seated herself at table, her chin in her
hands, looking toward the church and continuing to cry bitterly.

"See here, as for weeping and being in despair, it is surely a sin,"
remarked Porfiry Vladimirych sententiously. "And do you know what
a Christian must do on such an occasion? Not cry, but submit and
hope--that's how a Christian has to act."

But Anninka threw herself back on the chair and repeated, her arms
drooping helplessly:

"Ah, I do not know, I do not know, I do not know!"

"If you are crying your eyes out on account of your sister," Yudushka
continued to sermonize, "that is a sin, too. For although it is
praiseworthy to love one's sisters and brothers, yet, if it be the will
of God to take one or several of them to Himself----"

"Oh, no, no! Uncle, are you kind? Are you kind? Tell me!"

Anninka threw herself on him again and embraced him.

"Well, I am kind, kind. Tell me, do you wish anything? Will you have a
bite, or tea, or coffee? Ask for what you want. Order it."

Anninka suddenly remembered how during her first visit her uncle used
to ask her, "Will you have beef, pork, potatoes?" And she realized that
she would find no other consolation.

"Thank you, uncle," she said, seating herself at the table again. "I do
not want anything in particular. I am sure I shall be contented with
anything you offer me."

"If so, well and good. Will you go to Pogorelka?"

"No, uncle, for the time being I shall stay with you. You have nothing
against it, have you?"

"Christ be with you, of course I don't object. I asked about Pogorelka
only because in case you do wish to go there, it would be necessary to
arrange for a wagon and horses."

"No, later, later."

"Very well, then. You will go there later on. Meanwhile you can stay
with us. You will help about the house, for I'm all alone, you see.
This queen," said Yudushka, almost in hatred, pointing to Yevpraksia
pouring the tea, "is all the time running about in the servants'
quarters, so that sometimes you can never get any service, not a soul
in the whole house. Well, good-by for the present. I shall go to my
room. I shall pray, do some work and pray again. So, my friend. Is it
long since Lubinka died?"

"About a month, uncle."

"Then tomorrow we shall go to church early and order a mass to be
read for God's recently deceased servant Lubinka. So good-by for the
present. Have some tea, and if you want a bit of luncheon, have the
servant bring it to you. At dinner we shall meet again, have a talk,
a chat. And if anything has to be done, we shall attend to it, if
not--not."

Such was the first family meeting. When it was over, Anninka entered
upon her new life in that disgusting Golovliovo, where she was stranded
for the second time in her short life.