A hot midday in July; the Dubrovino manor-house all deserted. Workers
and idlers alike resting in the shade. Under the canopy of a huge
willow-tree in the front yard the dogs, too, were lying stretched out,
and you could hear the sound of their jaws when they drowsily snapped
at the flies. Even the trees drooped motionless, as if exhausted. All
the windows in the manor-house and the servants' quarters were flung
wide open. The heat seemed to surge in sweltering waves and the soil
covered with short, singed grass was ablaze. The atmosphere was a
blinding haze touched into gold, so that one could scarcely distinguish
things in the distance. The manor-house, once painted gray and now
faded into white, the small flower garden in front of the house, the
birch grove, separated from the farm by the road, the pond, the village
and the corn field, which touched the outskirts of the village, all
were immersed in the dazzling torrent. The fragrance of blossoming
linden trees mingled with the noxious emanations of the cattle shed.
There was not a breath of air, not a sound. Only from the kitchen
there came the grating of knives being sharpened, which foretold the
inevitable hash and beef cutlets for dinner.

Inside the house reigned noiseless confusion. An old lady and two young
girls were sitting in the dining room, forgetful of their crocheting,
which lay on the table. They were waiting with intense anxiety. In
the maids' room two women were busied preparing mustard plasters
and poultices, and the rhythmic tinkling of the spoons pierced the
silence like the chirping of a cricket. Barefooted girls were stealing
silently along the corridor, scurrying back and forth from the entresol
to the maids' room. At times a voice was heard from upstairs: "What
about the mustard plasters? Are you asleep there?" And a girl would
dash out of the maids' room. At last heavy footsteps sounded on the
staircase, and the regimental surgeon entered the dining room, a tall,
broad-shouldered man, with firm, ruddy cheeks, the picture of health.
His voice was sonorous, his gait steady, his eyes clear, gay and
frank, his lips full and fresh. In spite of his fifty years he was a
thoroughly fast liver and expected to see many years pass before he
would give up drinking and carousing. He wore a showy summer suit, and
his spotless piqué coat was trimmed with white buttons bearing arms. On
entering he made a clicking sound with his lips and tongue.

"Girls!" he shouted merrily, standing on the threshold. "Bring us some
vodka and something to eat."

"Well, doctor, how is he?" the old lady asked, her voice full of
anxiety.

"The Lord's mercy is infinite, Arina Petrovna," answered the physician.

"What do you mean? Then he----"

"Just so. He will last another two or three days, and then--good-bye!"
The doctor made an expressive gesture with his hand and hummed: "Head
over heels, head over heels he will fall."

"How's that? Doctors treated him--and now all of a sudden----"

"What doctors?"

"The _zemstvo_ doctor and one from the town used to come here."

"Fine doctors! If they'd given him a good bleeding, they'd have saved
him."

"So nothing at all can be done?"

"Well, I said, 'The Lord's mercy is great,' and I can add nothing to
that."

"But perhaps it will work?"

"What will work?"

"I mean--the mustard plasters."

"Perhaps."

A woman in a black dress and black shawl brought in a tray holding a
decanter of vodka, a dish of sausages and a dish of caviar. The doctor
helped himself to the vodka, held the glass to the light and smacked
his tongue.

"Your health, mother," he said to the old lady, and gulped the liquid.

"Drink in good health, my dear sir."

"This is the cause of Pavel Vladimirych dying in the prime of his life,
this vodka," said the doctor, grimacing comfortably and spearing a
piece of sausage with his fork.

"Yes, it's the ruin of many a man."

"That's because not everyone can stand it. But I can, and I shall have
another glass. Your health, madam."

"Drink, drink. Nothing can happen to you."

"Nothing. My lungs and kidneys and liver and spleen are in excellent
condition. By the way," he turned to the woman in black who stood at
the door, listening to the conversation, "What will you have for dinner
to-day?"

"Hash and beef cutlets and chicken for roast," she answered, smiling
somewhat sourly.

"Have you any smoked fish?"

"We have, sir. We have white sturgeon and stellated sturgeon, plenty of
it."

"Then have a cold soup with sturgeon for our dinner, and pick out a fat
bit of sturgeon, you hear me? What is your name? Ulita?"

"Yes, sir, people call me Ulita."

"Well, then, hurry up, friend Ulita, hurry up."

Ulita left the room, and for a while oppressive silence reigned.
Then Arina Petrovna rose from her seat and made sure Ulita was not
eavesdropping.

"Andrey Osipych, have you spoken to him yet about the orphans?" she
asked the doctor.

"Yes, I did."

"Well?"

"There was no change. 'When I get well' he kept on saying, 'I will make
my will and write the notes.'"

Silence, heavier than before, filled the room. The girls took the
crocheting from the table, and their trembling hands worked one row
after the other. Arina Petrovna heaved a deep sigh of dejection. The
doctor paced up and down the room and whistled, "Head over heels, head
over heels."

"But did you try to drive the matter home to him, doctor?"

"Well, I said to him: 'You'll be a scoundrel if you don't make a
definite provision for the orphans.' Could I make it clearer? Yes,
mother, you certainly slipped up. If you had called me in a month ago,
I would have given him a good bleeding and I would have seen to it that
he made his will. But now everything will go to Yudushka, the lawful
heir. It certainly will."

"Oh, grandmother, what will become of us?" said the older of the two
girls, plaintively and almost in tears. "What is uncle doing to us?"

The girls were Anninka and Lubinka, the daughters of Anna Vladimirovna
Ulanova, to whom Arina Petrovna had once "thrown a bone."

"I don't know, dear, I don't know. I don't even know what will become
of me. Today I am here, and tomorrow God knows where I'll be. Maybe
I'll have to sleep in a shed or at a peasant's."

"Goodness, isn't uncle silly!" exclaimed the younger girl.

"I wish, young lady, you would keep your mouth shut," remarked the
doctor. Turning to Arina Petrovna, he suggested, "Why not try to talk
to him yourself, mother?"

"No, no. There's no use my talking to him. He doesn't even want to see
me. The other day I stuck my nose into his room, and he snarled, 'Have
you come to see me off to the other world?'"

"I think Ulita is back of it all. She incites him against you."

"She surely does, nobody but she. And then she reports everything to
Porfiry the Bloodsucker. People say he keeps a pair of horses harnessed
all day waiting for the beginning of the agony. And just imagine, the
other day Ulita went so far as to take an inventory of the furniture,
wardrobe, and dishes, so that nothing should be lost, as she said. We
are the thieves, just imagine it."

"Why don't you treat her more severely? Head over heels, you know, head
over heels."

But fate decreed that the doctor should not develop his thought. A
girl, all out of breath, dashed into the room and exclaimed in a fright:

"The master! The master wants the doctor."