Anninka soon introduced an atmosphere of Bohemian life into Yudushka's
nest. She rose late and would roam about the house until dinner-time,
undressed, uncombed, with an aching head, and coughing in such agony
that each time it would send a shudder through Porfiry Vladimirych
in his study and quite frighten him. Her room was always untidy, the
bedding in disorder, and her clothes lying about on the chairs and
floor. At first she saw her uncle only at dinner and evening tea.
The master of Golovliovo came out of his room all dressed in black,
spoke little, and ate with his old-time exasperating slowness. He
was apparently observing her. After dinner came the early December
twilight. Anninka loved to watch the glimmer of the gray winter day
gradually die out and the fields grow dim; she loved to see the
shadows flood the rooms until finally the whole house was plunged in
impenetrable darkness. In the darkness she always felt at ease and
hardly ever lit the candles. The only one she allowed to burn was at
one end of the sitting-room. It was of cheap palm wax, and sputtered
and dripped, its feeble flame formed a tiny circle of light. For some
time the house would be astir with the usual after-dinner noises.
Plates would rattle in the hands of the dish-washers, and drawers open
and close with a clatter; but soon the sound of receding steps would
be heard and a dead silence begin to reign. Porfiry Vladimirych would
take his after-dinner nap and Yevpraksia bury herself in the bedding in
her room. Prokhor would go into the servants' room, and Anninka would
remain entirely alone.

She would pace from room to room, humming, trying to tire herself out,
but chiefly endeavoring to drive her thoughts away. In walking toward
the sitting-room she would fix her eyes upon the circle of light about
the candle, and walking away from it, she would try to single out some
point in the darkness and keep her eyes fixed on it. But in spite of
her efforts reminiscences surged up in her mind irresistibly. She saw
the dressing-room with its cheap wall paper, the inevitable pier-glass
and the equally inevitable bouquet from Lieutenant Pankov II; the stage
with the stage-properties, sooty, slippery from the damp; the hall with
its pieces of furniture picked up at random and its boxes upholstered
in threadbare purple plush,--the hall which, seen from the stage,
looked trim and even splendid, but in reality was dark and miserable.
And finally--officers, officers, officers without end. Then she saw the
hotel with the vile-smelling corridor, dimly lit by the smoky kerosene
lamp; the room she would dart into in order to change her dress for
further triumphs, the room with the bed in disorder from the morning;
the wash-stand full of dirty water, the bed-sheet lying on the floor,
her cast-off underwear forgotten on a chair. Next she saw herself in
the general dining-room, filled with kitchen odors, the tables set for
supper, with its tobacco smoke, noise, crowds, drinking, debauchery.
And again officers, officers, officers without end.

Such were her memories of the time she had once called the years of
her successes, triumphs, prosperity.

These reminiscences were followed by others, the prominent part in
which was played by the inn, filled with a foul stench, with walls on
which the vapor froze in the winter time, insecure flooring, and board
partitions, the glossy bellies of bed-bugs showing in the crevices.
Nights of drinking and brawls, travelling squires hastily taking
greenbacks out of their meager pocket-books, merchants encouraging the
"actresses" almost with a whip in hand. And in the morning--headaches,
nausea, and utter dejection. At last--Golovliovo.

Golovliovo was death itself, relentless, hollow-wombed death,
constantly lying in wait for new victims. Two uncles had died there,
two cousins had received mortal wounds. And Lubinka! Although Lubinka,
to be sure, had died somewhere in Kretchetov because of her "own
affairs," yet the origin of her wounds went back to her life at
Golovliovo. All the deaths, all the poisonings, all the pestilence,
came from there. There the orphans had been fed on rotten cured
meats, there they heard the first words of hatred and contempt for
human dignity. Not the slightest childish misdeed had passed without
punishment. Nothing could be hidden from the stony-hearted, eccentric
old woman, not an extra bite of bread, not a broken clay doll, not a
torn rag, not a worn shoe. Each breach of law and order was instantly
punished either with a reproach or a slap. And then, when they had
been permitted to dispose of themselves, when they had understood that
they might run away from the disgusting place, they ran--there! And
nobody kept them from running away, nor could they have been kept
from running away, because they could imagine nothing worse or more
repulsive than Golovliovo.

Ah, if all that could only be forgotten, if one could create a
different existence in one's dreams, a magic world that would supplant
both the past and the present! But alas, the reality Anninka had lived
through had so powerful a hold, that the clutch of it suppressed the
feeble efforts of her imagination. In vain did fancy endeavor to
imagine angels with silvery wings. From behind those angels peeped
inexorably the legions of Kukishevs, Lyulkins, Zabvennys, Popkovs.
Lord! Was all lost? Even the ability to deceive and beguile herself?
Had that been lost forever in the night revels, in wine, and in
debauchery? Yet that past had to be killed somehow, so as not to poison
her blood and rend her heart. It had to be crushed, utterly annihilated.

How strange and ruthless was that which had happened! It was impossible
even to conceive of some future, of some door by which to escape from
the situation, of anything at all that might occur to change things.
Nothing could occur. And what was even more unbearable was the fact
that to all intents and purposes she was already dead, with the outward
signs of life yet present. She should have ended it then, along with
Lubinka. Somehow she had remained alive. How was it that the mass of
shame which had come upon her then from all sides had not crushed her?
And what an insignificant worm she must have been to have crept out
from underneath that heap of heavy stones piled up on top of her!

She groaned in agony, and ran about the sitting-room, trying to kill
the burning memories. Before her eyes swam familiar images, the
Duchess of Herolstein shaking a pelisse, Clairette Angot in her wedding
gown with a slit in front up to her waist-line, Fair Helen with slits
in front, behind and at the sides. Nothing but obscenity and nakedness.
That was what her life had consisted of. Could all that possibly have
occurred?

About seven o'clock the house came to life again. The sounds of the
preparations for tea were heard, and at last came the voice of Porfiry
Vladimirych. Uncle and niece sat down at the tea table and exchanged
remarks about the day just ended; but the daily happenings were scanty
and so the conversation was brief. Having taken tea and kissed Anninka
on the forehead, Yudushka crept back into his den, while Anninka went
into Yevpraksia's room to play cards.

At eleven o'clock the debauchery began. Having ascertained that Porfiry
Vladimirych was fast asleep, Yevpraksia set the table with various
country corned meats and a bottle of vodka. Now came meaningless and
obscene songs, strumming on the guitar, and Anninka drinking between
the songs and the shameless talk. At first she drank after Kukishev's
manner, coolly, with a "Lord bless us" to each glass, but then she
gradually sank into gloom and began to moan and curse. Yevpraksia
looked at her and pitied her:

"As I look at you, lady," she said, "I am so sorry for you, so sorry."

"Drink with me and you won't be sorry," Anninka retorted.

"No, how can I? They nearly chased me out of the clergy estate because
of your uncle, and now if I become----"

"Well, then it can't be helped. Let me sing you _The Mustache._"

She strummed the guitar again, and again came the cry, "I-akh! I-okh!"
Late at night sleep would suddenly overtake her, obliterating her past
and allaying her sufferings for a few hours. The next day, broken down,
half-insane, she would again creep out from beneath the deadening load
of sleep and live anew.

One of those vile nights when Anninka was singing her filthy songs to
Yevpraksia, Yudushka's pale face, ghastly and harassed, appeared in the
doorway. His lips were quivering, his sunken eyes looked like sightless
cavities by the light of the candle. His hands were folded for prayer.
For a few seconds he stood in front of the dumfounded women, and then
slowly faced round and passed out.