Yudushka did not give the money to Petenka, though, kind father that
he was, he gave orders just before the moment of departure for some
chicken, veal and pie to be placed in the carriage. Then he went out
on the porch in the chilling wind to see his son off, and inquired
whether Petenka was seated comfortably and whether he had wrapped his
feet up well. Re-entering the house, he stood at the window in the
dining-room a long time making the sign of the cross and sending his
blessings after the vehicle that was carrying Petenka away. In a word,
he performed the farewell ceremony fittingly, as becomes good kinsfolk.

"Oh, Petka, Petka," he said, "you are a bad, bad son. Look at the
mischief you have done. My, my, my! And what could have been better
than to live on quietly and peacefully, nicely and easily with father
and old granny? But no! Crash! Bang! I am my own master, I've got a
head on my shoulders, too! Well, there's your head! My, what trouble!"

Not a muscle quivered in his wooden face, not a note in his voice
sounded like an appeal to a prodigal son. But, then, there was nobody
to hear his words, for Arina Petrovna was the only one beside himself
in the room, and as a result of the shock she had just gone through
she seemed to have lost all vitality, and sat near the samovar, her
mouth open, looking straight ahead, without hearing anything, without a
single thought in her mind.

Then life flowed on as usual, full of idle bustle and babbling.
Contrary to Petenka's expectations, Porfiry Vladimirych took the
maternal curse quite coolly and did not recede a hair's breadth from
the decision that had come from his head full-formed, as it were.

It is true he turned slightly pale and rushed toward his mother with a
cry:

"Mother, dear! Darling! Lord be with you! Be calm, dear! God is
merciful. All will be well."

But his words were expressive of alarm for her rather than for himself.
Her act had been so unexpected that Yudushka even forgot to pretend
to be frightened. Only last night his mother had been affectionate,
had jested, and played fool with Yevpraksia. Evidently, then, it
had all happened in a moment of sudden anger, and there was nothing
premeditated, nothing real about it all.

Indeed, he had been very much afraid of his mother's curse but he
had pictured it quite differently. In his idle mind he had built
an elaborate staging for the occasion, ikons, burning candles, his
mother standing in the center of the room, terrible, with a darkened
face as she hurled the curse. Then, thunder, candles going out, the
veil tearing asunder, darkness covering the earth, and above, amidst
the clouds the wrathful countenance of Jehovah illumined by a flash
of lightning. But nothing of the sort had happened, so his mother
had simply done something rash and silly. And she had had no reason
to curse him in earnest, because of late there had been no cause
for quarreling. Many changes had occurred since Yudushka expressed
his doubt as to whether a certain coach belonged to his mother dear
(Yudushka admitted to _himself_ that _then_ he had been wrong and
deserved damnation). Arina Petrovna had become more submissive, and
Porfiry Vladimirych had but one thought in his head: how to placate his
mother dear.

"The old woman is doing poorly, my, how poorly! At times she even
raves," he consoled himself. "The darling sits down to play fool and
before you know it, she dozes off."

In justice to Yudushka it must be admitted that his mother's
decrepitude gave him some alarm. Even he was not quite ready for her
death, had not made any plans, had had no time to make estimates--how
much capital mother had when she left Dubrovino, what that capital
might bring in annually, how much of the interest she had spent, and
how much she had added to the principal. In a word, he had not gone
through an infinity of useless trifles, without which he always felt as
if he were caught unawares.

"The old woman is hale and hearty," he would muse at times. "Still she
won't spend it all--impossible. When she shared us out, she had a neat
sum. Maybe she transferred some to the orphans. Oh, the old woman is
rich. Yes, she is."

But these musings were not so very serious, and vanished without
leaving an impress on his mind. The mass of daily trivialities was
already great, and there was as yet no urgent need to augment them by
the addition of new trivialities. Porfiry Vladimirych kept putting the
matter off, and did not realize it was time to begin until after the
damnation scene.

The catastrophe came sooner than he expected. On the second day after
Petenka's departure Arina Petrovna left for Pogorelka, and never again
visited Golovliovo. She spent a month in total solitude, keeping to her
room and scarcely exchanging a word with her servants. From force of
habit she rose early in the morning, sat down at her desk, and began
to play patience, but hardly ever brought the game to an end, and sat
in frozen rigidity--with her glazed eyes fixed on the window. What she
thought about or whether she thought at all, even the keenest judge of
the deep-lying mysteries of the human soul could not have divined. She
seemed to be trying to recollect something, perhaps how she came to be
within those walls, and could not. Alarmed by her mistress's silence,
Afimyushka would appear in the room, arrange the pillows lining her
easy-chair, and try to open a conversation on this or that, but
received only impatient monosyllabic replies.

Once or twice Porfiry Vladimirych came to Pogorelka, invited mother
dear to Golovliovo, tried to kindle her imagination with the prospect
of mushrooms, German carp, and the other allurements of Golovliovo, but
his overtures evoked nothing but an enigmatic smile.

One morning she tried to leave her bed as usual, but could not, though
she felt no particular pain, and complained of nothing. She took it,
apparently, as a matter of course, without any sign of alarm. The very
day before she had been sitting at the table and even walked, though
with difficulty, and now she was in bed "feeling indisposed." It was
even more comfortable. But Afimyushka became thoroughly frightened
and without the mistress's knowledge sent a messenger to Porfiry
Vladimirych.

Yudushka came early the next morning. Arina Petrovna was considerably
worse. He put the servants through a cross-examination as to what
mother had eaten and whether she had not overeaten. But Arina Petrovna
had eaten almost nothing for a whole month, and had refused all food
the previous day. Yudushka expressed his grief, waved his hands, and
like a good son, warmed himself at the oven in the maids' room so that
he would not bring the cold into the patient's room. At the same time
he began to give orders and make arrangements. He had an extraordinary
keenness for scenting death. He made inquiries as to whether the priest
was home and arranged that in case of emergency he should be sent for
at once. He informed himself where mother's chest with her papers was,
whether it was locked, and having satisfied himself concerning the
state of things, he called in the cook and ordered dinner for himself.

"I need but little," he said. "Have you got a chicken? Well, prepare
some chicken soup. If you have some cured beef, get a bit of cured beef
ready. Then something fried, and I'll have enough."

Arina Petrovna lay prostrate on her back with her mouth open, breathing
heavily. Her eyes were staring wide. One hand projected from under the
quilt of hare's fur and hung stiff. She was evidently alive to the
commotion incident upon her son's arrival, and perhaps his orders even
reached her ears. The lowered window-shades put the room in twilight.
The wicks were flickering their last at the bottom of the ikon lamps
and sputtered audibly at contact with the water. The air was close
and fetid, unbearably suffocating from the overheated stoves, the
sickening smell of the ikon lamps, and the breath of illness. Porfiry
Vladimirych, in his felt boots, glided to his mother's bed like a
snake. His tall, lean figure wrapped in twilight swayed uncannily.
Arina Petrovna with a look half of surprise and half of fright followed
his movements and huddled under her quilt.

"It is I, mother dear," he said. "What's the matter with you? You are
all out of gear today. My, my, my! No wonder I could not sleep all
night. Something seemed to urge me on. 'Let's go and see,' I thought,
'how our Pogorelka friends are getting along.' I got up in the morning,
hitched a couple of horses to the pony cart, and here I am!"

Porfiry Vladimirych tittered affably, but Arina Petrovna did not
answer, and drew herself together in a closer coil under her quilt.

"Well, God is merciful, mother dear," continued Yudushka. "The main
thing is to stand up for yourself. Don't put any stock in the ailment.
Get up and take a walk through the room, like a sound, hale person. You
see, just like this."

Porfiry Vladimirych rose from his seat and demonstrated how sound, hale
persons walk.

"Oh, just a moment. I'll raise the window-shade and take a good look
at you. Oh, but you are first rate, my darling. Just pluck up some
courage, say your prayers, doll up, get into your Sunday best, and
you'll be ready for a dance. There, I have brought you some jolly good
holy water, just taste some."

Porfiry Vladimirych took a flask out of his pocket, found a wine glass
on the table, filled it and gave it to the patient. Arina Petrovna made
an effort to lift her head, but in vain.

"I wish the orphans were here," she moaned.

"Well, much need you have of the orphans here. Oh, mother, mother! How
is it all of a sudden you--really! Just a little bad turn, and at
once you are ready to give up the ship. We'll attend to it all. We'll
send a special messenger to the orphans and we'll do everything else
in due time. Now, what's the hurry, really? We are going to live yet,
yes indeed we are. And we'll have a fine time of it, too. Wait till
summer is here, we'll both of us go to the woods to pick mushrooms,
and raspberries, and nice juicy black currants. Or else, we'll go
to Dubrovino to catch German carps. We'll bring out the horse and
carriage, get into it, and one, two, three--there we go. Nicely and
easily."

"I wish the orphans were here," repeated Arina Petrovna in anguish.

"We'll bring the orphans, too. Give us time. We'll call them together,
all of them. We'll all be here and sit by you. You will be the
brood-hen and we'll be your chicks. We'll have it all, if you behave.
Now you are a naughty girl, because you went and took sick. That's
the kind of mischief you're up to. My, my! Instead of being good and
serving as an example for others, look what you're doing. That's bad,
my dear, very bad."

But no matter how hard Porfiry Vladimirych tried to cheer up his mother
dear with banter, her strength waned from hour to hour. A messenger was
dispatched to town to fetch a doctor, and since the patient persisted
in moaning and calling the orphans, Yudushka in his own hand wrote
a letter to Anninka and Lubinka in which he compared his and their
conduct, called himself a Christian and them ungrateful. At night the
doctor arrived, but it was too late. Arina Petrovna's fate was sealed.
At about four o'clock in the morning the death agony set in and at six
Porfiry Vladimirych was kneeling at his mother's bed wailing:

"Mother dear! My friend! Give me your blessing!"

But Arina Petrovna did not hear him. Her wide-open eyes stared dimly
into space as if she were trying to understand something and could not.

Yudushka, too, did not understand. He did not understand that the
yawning grave was to carry off the last creature that linked him to the
living world.

With his usual bustle he delved into the mass of trifles and details
that were incident upon the ceremonial of burial. He had requiems
chanted, ordered memorial masses for the future, discussed matters
with the priest, hurried from room to room with his shambling gait.
Every now and then he peeped into the dining-room where the deceased
lay, crossed himself, lifted his hands heavenward, and late at night
stole quietly to the door to listen to the sexton's monotonous reading
of the Psalms. He was pleasantly surprised that his expenses upon the
occasions would be very slight, for Arina Petrovna long before her
death had put away a sum of money for her burial and itemized in detail
the various expenditures.

Having buried his mother, Porfiry Vladimirych at once began to
familiarize himself with her effects. Examining the papers he
found about a dozen various wills (in one of them she called him
"undutiful"); but all of them had been written when Arina Petrovna was
still the domineering, despotic mistress, and were incomplete--in the
form of tentative drafts.

So Yudushka was quite pleased that he had no need to play foul in order
to declare himself the sole legitimate heir to his mother's property.
The latter consisted of a capital of fifteen thousand rubles and of a
scanty movable estate which included the famous coach that had nearly
become the cause of dissension between mother and son. Arina Petrovna
kept her own accounts quite separate and distinct from those of her
wards, so that one could see at a glance what belonged to her and what
to the orphans. Yudushka lost no time in declaring himself heir at the
proper legal places. He sealed the papers bearing on the guardianship,
gave the servants his mother's scanty wardrobe, and sent the coach and
two cows to Golovliovo, which were placed in the inventory under the
heading "mine." Then he had the last requiem performed and went his way.

"Wait for the owners," he told the people gathered in the hallway to
see him off. "If they come, they'll be welcome; if they don't--just as
they please. For my part, I did all I could. I straightened out the
guardianship accounts and hid nothing. Everything was done in plain
view, in front of everybody. The money that mother left belongs to me
legally. The coach and the two cows that I sent to Golovliovo are mine
_by law._ Maybe some of my property is left _here._ However, I won't
insist on it. God Himself commands us to give to orphans. I am sorry to
have lost mother, she was a good old woman, a kindly soul. Oh, mother
dear, it was not right of you, darling, to have left us poor orphans.
But if it had pleased God to take you, it befits us to submit to His
holy will. May, at least, your soul rejoice in heaven, and as for
us--well, we are not to be considered."

The first death was soon followed by another.

Yudushka's attitude toward his son's fate was quite puzzling. Since he
did not receive newspapers and was not in correspondence with anybody,
he could not learn anything of the trial in which Petenka figured. And
he hardly wished to. Above all things, he shunned disturbance of every
kind. He was buried up to his ears in a swamp of petty details, all
centering around the welfare and preservation of his precious self.
There are many such people in this world. They live apart from the rest
of humanity, having neither the desire nor the knowledge to identify
themselves with a "cause," and bursting in the end like so many soap
bubbles. They have no ties of friendship, for friendship presupposes
the existence of common interests; nor do they have any business
connections. For thirty years at a stretch Porfiry Vladimirych had
marked time in a government office. Then, one fine day he disappeared,
and no one noticed the fact.

He learned of his son's fate after his domestics had. But even then
he feigned ignorance, so that when Yevpraksia once tried to mention
Petenka, he waved her off and said:

"No, no, no! I don't know, I did not hear anything, and I don't want to
hear anything. I don't want to know a thing about his dirty affairs."

But finally he did learn about Petenka. He received a letter from him
saying he was about to leave for one of the remote provinces and asking
his father to continue to send him an allowance in his new position.
The whole of the next day Porfiry Vladimirych was in a state of visible
perplexity. He darted from room to room, peeped into the oratory,
crossed himself, and sighed. But toward evening he plucked up courage
and wrote the following letter:

/#
        "My criminal son Piotr:

        "As a faithful and law-abiding subject I should not even
        answer your letter. But as a father given to human weaknesses,
        I cannot, from a sense of compassion, refuse good advice to
        a child who, through his own fault, plunged himself into a
        whirlpool of evil.

        "Here, in short, is my opinion on the subject. The punishment
        that has been meted out to you is severe, but you quite deserve
        it. That is the first and most important consideration that
        should always accompany you in your new life from now on.
        All your other vagaries and even the memory thereof you must
        forget, for in your present situation all this will only tend
        to irritate you and urge you on to impious complaint. You have
        already tasted of the bitter fruits of haughtiness of spirit.
        Try now to taste of the fruits of humility, all the more so
        since there is nothing else left for you in the future. Do not
        complain of the punishment, for the authorities do not even
        punish you, but only provide means for your correction. To be
        grateful for this, and to endeavor to make amends for what
        you did--that is what you must incessantly bear in mind, and
        not the luxurious frittering away of time, which I myself, by
        the way, never did, although I was never under indictment.
        So follow this prudent advice of mine and turn over a new
        leaf, satisfied with what the authorities, in their kindness,
        will deem it necessary to allot to you. I, for my part, will
        pray the Giver of all things good to grant you firmness and
        humility. Even on the very day on which I write these lines I
        have been to church and offered up fervent prayers for you. And
        now, I bless you for the new journey and remain, your indignant
        but still loving father, Porfiry Golovliov."
#/

It is uncertain whether the letter ever reached Petenka, but no more
than a month after it was sent, Porfiry Vladimirych was officially
notified that his son, while on his way to the place of exile, had
fallen ill and died in a hospital.

Yudushka remained alone, but at first did not realize that this
new loss had made his life an absolute void. The realization came
soon after the death of Arina Petrovna, when he was all absorbed in
reckoning and figuring. He read every paper of the deceased, took into
account every kopek, traced the relation of this kopek to the kopeks
of the guardianship, not wishing, as he put it, either to acquire
another's, or to lose his own. Amidst this bustle the question never
once arose in his mind: To what end was he doing all this, and who was
to enjoy the fruits of his busy hoarding?

From morning to night he bent over his desk musing and criticizing the
arrangements of the deceased. Engrossed in these cares he began little
by little to neglect the bookkeeping of his own estate.

The manor fell into profound silence. The domestics, who had always
preferred the servants' quarters, abandoned the house almost entirely,
and when in the master's rooms would walk on tiptoe and speak in a
whisper. There was an air of desertion and death about the place and
about the man, something eery. The gloom enveloping Yudushka was to
grow denser every day.