The brothers departed, and the manor-house of Golovliovo was deserted.
With renewed energy, Arina Petrovna took up her work again. The
clatter of the knives in the kitchen ceased, but activities in office,
storehouses, cellars, were redoubled. Summer, the great provider,
was nearly over; preserving, canning, pickling, storing were in full
swing. Winter provisions flowed in from all quarters, dried mushrooms,
berries, eggs, vegetables. This requisition in kind imposed upon the
peasant women came in wagons from all the various family estates.
Everything was measured and added to the stores of former years. Not in
vain had the lady of Golovliovo had a long row of cellars, storehouses
and granaries built. They were full to the brim. Quite a good deal of
damaged material was along with the rest and smelt foully. At the end
of summer the stuff was all sorted and what was suspicious was sent to
the servants' quarters.

"The pickles are still in good condition, only the skin is coming off
in some places, and they smell a little. Well, let the servants enjoy a
dainty bit," Arina Petrovna would say, pointing out the barrels to be
put aside.

Stepan Vladimirych adapted himself admirably to his new condition. At
times he felt a strong craving to get drunk as a piper. He had money
for the purpose, as we shall see later. But he restrained himself
stoically, as if considering that the time had not yet arrived. He
was always busy now, for he took a lively part in the provisioning,
rejoicing in its successes and regretting its failures in a wholly
disinterested manner. In a sort of ecstasy, hatless, clad in his
dressing-gown, he scurried from the office to the cellars, hiding from
his mother behind trees and various small buildings that crowded the
court-yard. Arina Petrovna noticed him in this garb many times, and
felt an itching in her motherly heart to give Simple Simon a severe
scolding, but on second thought she left him alone in his escapades.
In the cellars Stepan Vladimirych with feverish impatience watched how
the carts were unloaded, how jars, barrels and tubs were brought in
from the estate, and everything was assorted and finally sent off into
the yawning abyss of cellars and storehouses. He felt satisfied in most
instances.

"To-day two wagons of mushrooms came from Dubrovino. Ripping fine
mushrooms, brother," he informed the village clerk rapturously. "And we
were afraid we should have to get along without mushrooms this winter.
Bravo, Dubrovino fellow, much obliged! Fine fellows they are! They have
helped us out!"

On another occasion, he said:

"To-day mother gave an order to catch some carps in the pond. You ought
to see them! Some three feet long! It looks as if we were going to live
on carp the whole week."

Sometimes he was worried.

"The cucumbers failed completely this season. There is not a good one
among them--all crooked and spotty. They're just good enough to be
sent to the servants' quarters. We shall have to use last year's."

He did not approve of Arina Petrovna's management. "Goodness, what
heaps of provisions she allows to rot! Just now she's having cured
meat, pickles, fish and what not hauled to the servants' quarters.
Is that what you call good business? Is that the right way of doing
things, I'd like to know. There are lots of fresh provisions, but she
will not touch them until the old rot is eaten up."

The confidence entertained by Arina Petrovna that it would be easy to
induce Simple Simon to sign any paper proved wholly justified. Not only
did he not object to signing all the papers that his mother sent him,
but the same evening he even boasted about it to the village clerk.

"Well, brother, to-day I have been doing nothing but signing papers. I
have renounced all my rights of inheritance. I am cleaned out. Not a
cent to my name, and none coming. I have set the old woman at ease."

He parted with his brothers peaceably, and was in raptures over his
big supply of tobacco. Of course, he couldn't help calling Porfisha
Bloodsucker and Yudushka, but the disparaging terms were drowned in a
deluge of incoherent, meaningless chatter.

In taking leave the brothers became liberal and even gave him money.
Porfiry Vladimirych accompanied his gift with the following speech:

"This money will be handy in case you need oil for the ikon lamp or if
you want to set up a candle in the church. That's how it is, brother.
Be good and gentle, and our dear mother will be satisfied. You will
have your comforts, and all of us will be merry and happy. Our mother
is a kindly soul, you know."

"There is no denying that she is kindly," agreed Stepan Vladimirych.
"Only she feeds me on rotten pickled meat."

"Whose fault is it? Who treated mother's blessing with disrespect? It
is your own fault that you lost your estate. What a nice little estate
it was. If you only knew how to behave yourself and live modestly, you
would now be eating beef and veal and even ordering sauce with them.
You would have plenty of everything, potatoes, cabbage, peas. Am I not
right, brother?"

Had Arina Petrovna heard this harangue, it would have made her
impatient, and she would have let the orator know that it did. But
Simple Simon was fortunate that his mind could not, as it were, retain
other people's words, and not a syllable of Yudushka's speech reached
its destination.

So Stepan Vladimirych parted with his brothers amicably. And there was
some vanity in his showing Yakov, the village clerk, two twenty-five
ruble notes that had been left in his hands after the brothers had
departed.

"This will last me a long time," he said. "We've got tobacco. We're
well provided with tea and sugar. Nothing is missing but vodka.
However, should we want vodka, we'll get vodka, too. Nevertheless, I
will restrain myself for a little while yet. I am too busy now, I have
to keep an eye on the cellars. Weaken your watch for a single instant,
and everything will be pillaged. _She_ saw me, brother, she saw me, the
hag, once, when I was gliding by along the kitchen wall. She stood at
the window looking at me and I bet she thought: 'Well, well, so that's
why I miss so many cucumbers.'"

Then came October. It began to rain, the road turned black, into
an impassable stream of mud. Stepan Vladimirych could not go out
because his only garments were his father's old dressing-gown and
worn slippers. He sat at his window watching the tiny, humble village
drowned in mud. There, in the gray autumn mist, men were moving about
briskly, looking like black dots.

The heavy summer work was still in full swing, but now its setting was
no longer the jubilant, sun-flooded hues of summer, but the endless
autumn twilight. The corn kilns emitted clouds of smoke far into the
night. The melancholy clatter of the flails resounded in the air.
Thrashing was also going on in the manorial barns, and in the office
they said it would hardly be possible to get through with the whole
mass of grain before Shrovetide. Everything looked gloomy and drowsy,
everything spoke of oppressiveness. The doors of the counting-house
were no longer ajar, and inside the air was filled with a bluish fog
rising from the wet fur cloaks.

It is difficult to say what impression this spectacle of a toilsome,
rural autumn made on Stepan's mind, and whether he was at all aware of
the labors going on in the incessant rain out in the boggy fields. One
thing is certain, that the drab, tearful autumn sky oppressed him. It
seemed to hang close down over his head and threaten to drown him in a
deluge of mud. All he had to do was to look out through the window and
watch the heavy masses of clouds. From the dawn on they covered the
heavens, hanging motionless as if spellbound. Even after several hours
they were still in the same place, without the slightest apparent
change in hue or outline. In the morning, one cloud, heavy and black,
had a ragged shape resembling a priest in a cassock with outstretched
arms. It was clearly outlined on the pallid background of the upper
clouds, and at noon it still had the identically same form. The right
hand, it is true, had become shorter, and the left was stretched out in
an ugly fashion and was sending down such a flood of rain that against
the dark background of the sky there formed a streak still darker,
almost black. Another huge shaggy lump of a cloud a little farther up
hung over the village, threatening to smother it, you would think.
Hours later it was still hanging in the same place, the same shaggy
monster with outstretched paws, as though ready to pounce upon the
earth. Clouds, clouds, nothing but clouds! Around five o'clock a change
took place, darkness gradually enveloped heaven and earth, and soon
the clouds disappeared completely, vanishing beneath a black shroud.
They were the first to go, next followed the forest and the village,
then the church, the chapel, the hamlet, the orchard, and finally the
manor-house, several yards away.

It has already become quite dark in the room, and there is no light.
So what can one do but pace up and down? A morbid languor seizes
Stepan's brain; his entire body, despite its idleness, is filled
with an incomprehensible, indescribable feeling of fatigue. Just one
thought moves in him and sucks at him--the grave, the grave, the
grave! Those black dots which have recently been moving busily on the
dark background of the boggy soil and near the village barns are not
oppressed by that thought. They will not perish under the burden of
despondency and weariness. If they do not challenge the sky directly,
at least they struggle, build, make enclosures, repair their houses.
Stepan did not question whether all this bustle was worth the while,
but he was aware that even the nameless dots were incomparably superior
to him, that he couldn't even struggle, that he had nothing to build,
nothing to repair.

He spent the evenings in the counting-house, because Arina Petrovna
refused to supply him with candles. Several times, through the
bailiff, he asked for boots and a fur coat, and was invariably told
that boots were not kept in store for him, but that he would be given
a pair of felt shoes as soon as the cold spells arrived. Evidently,
Arina Petrovna intended to fulfill her program literally, that was,
to sustain her son in such a manner as barely to keep him from
starvation. At first he abused his mother, but then behaved as though
he had forgotten all about her. Even the light of the candles in the
counting-room annoyed him, and he began to lock himself in his room
and remain all alone in the darkness. There was just a single refuge
left, one that he still dreaded but that attracted him irresistibly,
to get drunk and forget deeply, irrevocably, to plunge into the sea
of oblivion and never emerge again. Everything drove him to it, the
debauchery of the past, the enforced idleness of the present, his
ailing body with the torturing cough, the unbearable asthma, and the
constantly increasing pains in his heart. At last the hour came.

"You must fetch me a bottle of vodka for to-night," he said once to the
village clerk in a voice boding little good.

That one bottle of vodka was followed by a long succession of other
bottles. After that he got drunk every night. At nine o'clock, when
the light in the counting-house had been put out and the servants had
retired to their quarters, he placed a bottle of vodka and a slice of
rye bread thickly strewn over with salt on the table. He did not attack
the liquor at once, but approached it stealthily as it were. Everybody
on the place was fast asleep. The mice scudded behind the wall paper
and the clock in the counting-house ticked ominously. Stepan threw off
his dressing-gown, and began to stride back and forth in the overheated
room, with nothing but a shirt on his back. At times he stopped, went
over to the table, searched for the bottle in the darkness, then
resumed his restless pacing. The first tumblers he emptied in a sort of
passion, voluptuously swallowing down the burning liquid. But little by
little his heart began to beat faster, the blood mounted to his head,
and he mumbled incoherently. His feeble imagination tried to create
images, his blunted memory attempted to pierce the mists of the past.
But the images were broken and meaningless, and the past remained dim
and formless. There was no recollection, either bitter or sweet, as
though an impervious wall separated the past from the present.

He was completely filled by the present, which seemed like a prison
cell, in which he would be locked up for eternity without consciousness
of time or space. His mind took in nothing but the room, the stove,
the three windows in the front wall, the squeaking wooden bed with its
mattress worn thin, and the table with the bottle.

As the contents of the bottle decreased and his head grew hotter and
hotter, even this boresome sense of the present gradually faded. His
mumblings, to which at first there had been a bit of form, now lost
all meaning. His pupils dilated in the attempt to pierce the engulfing
darkness. Finally, the darkness itself vanished and its place was taken
by a phosphorescent sheen.

It was an endless void, with not a color or a sound, but radiant with
sinister splendor. The void followed him in his wanderings, trod on
his heels at every step. There were no walls, no windows, nothing
but this endless vacant splendor. Dread fell on him, coupled with an
irresistible impulse to annihilate even the void. A few more efforts,
and his goal was reached. His stumbling legs carried a benumbed body,
his chest gave forth not a murmur but an inarticulate cry, his very
existence seemingly ceased. A strange stupor took possession of him, in
which conscious life had no part, which plumbed the depths of a life
independent of and beyond the boundaries of normal existence. Groans
burst from his chest without in the least disturbing his sleep. His
organic disease continued its destructive work, without apparently
causing him any physical pain.

He rose early in the morning, filled with agonizing longing, disgust
and hatred. It was an inarticulate hatred, without either cause
or definite object. His bloodshot eyes rolled restlessly, his
limbs trembled, his heart worked with sickening irregularity, now
stopping altogether, now hammering with such violence that his hand
involuntarily clutched at his breast. Not a thought, not a desire!
Objects of immediate perception filled his mind so completely that it
was closed to other impressions.

He filled his pipe and lighted it. It dropped from his nerveless
fingers. His tongue mumbled something, but seemingly by force of habit
only. He sat in silence and stared at one point. He felt an intense
craving to raise the temperature of his body so that he would feel
the presence of life for at least a short while. But he had no way of
getting vodka in the daytime. He had to wait for night to attain those
blissful moments when the ground vanished from under his feet and the
four odious prison walls were replaced by a shoreless, shining void.

Arina Petrovna had not the slightest idea of how Simple Simon spent his
time. The casual glimmer of feeling which had appeared for a moment
during the conversation with the Bloodsucker vanished so precipitately
that she was unconscious of its ever having appeared. It was not a
premeditated course of action on her part, but sheer oblivion. She
completely forgot that in the counting-house, in close proximity to
her, there lived a human being bound to her by ties of blood, who
perhaps was pining away in the yearning for life. Once having cut out
a certain channel in life and filling it almost mechanically with
the same things, she thought others ought to do likewise, it never
occurring to her that the very character of the things life holds vary
among people according to a multitude of circumstances in different
combinations, and that these things may be dear to some, herself among
these some, while they are an abomination and a tyranny to others.

Therefore when the bailiff repeatedly reported that "something was the
matter" with Stepan Vladimirych, the words slipped by her ears, leaving
no impression on her mind. Indeed, she scarcely ever even replied, and
when she did, then only with the stereotyped reply:

"Oh, well, he'll be all right. I bet he'll outlive you and me. Nothing
is the matter with the shambling colt. Coughing, you say! Well, some
people cough thirty years on end and they don't feel it."

Nevertheless, one morning when they came and told her that Stepan
Vladimirych had disappeared during the night, she was aroused.
Immediately she sent out all the available men in search of him, and
herself started an investigation beginning with the room in which
Stepan had lived. The first thing that struck her was a bottle standing
on the table, with a bit of vodka in it.

"What's this?" she asked, pretending not to understand.

"Why, I guess--the young master indulged," stammered the bailiff.

"Who supplied----?" she began, flaring up. But she restrained herself,
and continued her investigation, hiding her rage.

The room was so filthy that even she, who did not know and did not
recognize any demands of comfort, began to feel awkward. The ceiling
was smutty, the wall paper in many places was hanging in tatters, the
window-sills were black with a thick layer of tobacco ashes, pillows
were lying about on the floor beslimed with viscous mud, on the bed lay
a crumpled sheet, gray with accumulated dirt. In one window the winter
frame had been taken, or, rather, torn out, and the window itself was
left half open. Apparently it was through this opening that Simple
Simon had disappeared. Arina Petrovna instinctively looked out on the
road and became more frightened. It was already the first of November,
but the autumn that year had lasted long, and the cold spells had not
yet arrived. Both the road and the field were one black sea of mud. How
had he got away? Where had he gone to? Here it occurred to her that he
had nothing on but a dressing-gown and a slipper. The other slipper had
been found under the window. And the night before it had been pouring
ceaselessly.

"It's a long, long time since I've been here," she said, inhaling
instead of air a foul mixture of vodka, tobacco and sheepskin
evaporations.

All day long, while the servants were searching the forest, she stood
at the window staring dully out upon the naked fields unrolled before
her eyes. So much ado on account of Simple Simon! It seemed like a
preposterous dream. She had _said_ he ought to have been shipped off to
the Vologda village. "No," that cursed Yudushka had wheedled, "leave
him here, dearest mother, at Golovliovo." Now handle him, if you
please, Yudushka.

"I wish he had lived there, out of my sight, as he pleased--Christ
be with him!" Arina Petrovna mused. "But I did my part. If he wasted
one good thing, well, I would throw him another. If he'd have wasted
the other, too, well, what could I do then? Even God can't fill a
bottomless belly. Everything would have been peaceful and quiet here.
But now--who knows what he has been up to? Go, look in the forest and
whistle for him. It would be good if he were brought home alive, but
with drunken eyes one is liable to run into a noose--take a rope, tie
it to a branch, put it round his neck, and no more Stiopka. His mother
denied herself sleep and food, and he has invented a new style--hanging
himself. There would be some excuse for him if he had had it hard
here. But goodness, what did he have to do but walk about in his
room all day and eat and drink? Another son would not have known how
to thank his mother enough. And how does this precious son repay his
mother? Goes and hangs himself. The idea!"

Arina Petrovna's surmises about Simple Simon's violent death were not
justified. Toward evening he was brought back in a peasant wagon, still
alive. He was in a semi-conscious state, all bruised and cut, his face
blue and swollen. He had been found at the Dubrovino estate, twenty
miles away.

The returned fugitive slept straight through the next twenty-four
hours. When he awoke, he stumbled to his feet and began to pace up and
down the room as was his habit, but he did not touch the pipe and made
no reply to the questions he was asked. Arina Petrovna's heart softened
so that on the spur of the moment she all but had him transferred
to the manor-house. Then she quieted down, and left him in the
counting-house, but gave orders for the room to be scoured and tidied
up, the bed linen changed, curtains hung, and so on.

The following evening, when told that Stepan Vladimirych was awake, she
had him brought to the house for tea and found it possible, in talking
to him, to inject kindliness into her voice.

"Why did you go away from your mother?" she began. "Do you know you
caused her great anxiety? It's good the news did not reach papa. It
would have been a terrible shock to the poor sick man."

But Stepan seemed altogether indifferent to his mother's kindly words.
He kept staring at the candle with his glassy eyes, as if watching the
snuff forming on the wick.

"My, my, aren't you a foolish boy?" continued Arina Petrovna, growing
kinder and kinder. "Just think what rumors will be spread about your
mother because of you. There are enough people who envy her. What will
they not say about her? They will say she did not give you food or
clothes. My, my, what a foolish boy you are!"

There was the same silence and the same motionless staring glance.

"Was your stay at mother's so bad? Thank God, you don't go hungry or
naked. What else do you want? If you are lonesome, don't fret. This
is nothing but a village, my boy. We have no entertainments or halls,
we sit in our nooks and we hardly know how to while away the time. I,
myself, would be glad to dance now and then or sing a song, but you
look out upon the road and you lose the desire to go even to church in
such weather."

Arina Petrovna paused, hoping that Simple Simon would give utterance to
at least some sounds, but he was as dumb as a stone. She was beginning
to work up a temper, but restrained herself.

"And if you were discontented with anything, if perhaps you lacked
food or linen, could you not explain it frankly to your mother? Could
you not say, 'Mamma, darling, won't you have some liver or curd-cakes
prepared for me?' Do you think your mother would have refused you? Or
if you wanted a drop of vodka, goodness, I wouldn't have begrudged you
a glass or two. To think of it, you were not ashamed to beg from a
serf, while it was difficult for you to say a word to your own mother."

But her flattering words were of no avail. Simple Simon remained
impervious to either emotion (Arina Petrovna had hoped he would kiss
her hand) or repentance. In fact, he seemed to have heard nothing.

From that time on he never spoke a single word. All day long he
walked up and down his room, his brows knit and his lips moving,
apparently never growing tired. At times he halted as if wishing to
say something, but he could not find the words. He had not lost the
capacity for thinking, but impressions left so slight a trace on his
brain that he could not hold them for any appreciable length of time.
Consequently his failure to find the necessary words did not even make
him impatient. Arina Petrovna, for her part, thought he would surely
set the house on fire.

"He does not say a word all day long," she repeated. "Still he must be
thinking of something, the blockhead! I am sure he'll set the house on
fire one of these days."

But the blockhead did not think of anything at all. He was deeply
immersed in absolute darkness, in which there was no room either for
reality or the illusory world of imagination. His brain did work, but
in a void, disconnected from either the past, the present, or the
future. It was as though he was completely wrapt up in a black cloud
and all he did was to scan it, to watch its imaginary fluctuations,
and, at times, to make a feeble attempt at resisting its sinister sway.
The whole physical and spiritual world dwindled down to that enigmatic
cloud.

In December of the same year, Porfiry Vladimirych received the
following letter from his mother:

"Yesterday morning God visited us with a new ordeal. My son and your
brother, Stepan, breathed his last. The very evening before he had been
quite well and even took his supper, but in the morning he was found
dead in bed. Such is the brevity of this earthly life! And what is most
grievous to a mother's heart is that he left this world of vanity for
the realm of the unknown without the last communion.

"May this be a warning to us all. He who sets at naught the ties of
kinship must always await such an end. Failures in this life, untimely
death, and everlasting torments in the life to come, all these evils
spring from the one source. For, however learned and exalted we may
be, if we do not honor our parents, our learning and eminence will
be turned into nothingness. Such are the precepts which every one
inhabiting this world must commit to his mind. Besides, slaves should
revere their masters.

"Notwithstanding this, all honors were duly given to him who had
departed into life eternal, as becomes my son. The pall was ordered
from Moscow, and the burial ceremonies were solemnly presided over by
the Father archimandrite. And according to the Christian custom, I am
having memorial services performed daily. I mourn the loss of my son,
but I do not complain, nor do I advise you, my children, to do so. For
who knows? We may be mourning and complaining here while his soul may
be rejoicing in Heaven."