Arina Petrovna received her sons solemnly, weighed down by grief. Two
maids supported her under the armpits. Her grey locks streamed out from
under her cap, her head drooped, and shook from side to side, and her
limbs seemed hardly able to support her. She always liked to play the
part of a venerable, careworn mother before her children, moving with
difficulty and getting her maids to assist her. Simple Simon called
such solemn receptions high mass, herself a bishop, and the maids,
Polka and Yulka, mace-bearers. As it was late at night the interview
was almost a silent one. Without saying a word she gave her sons her
hand to kiss; kissed them in turn, and made the sign of the cross over
them; and when Porfiry Vladimirych made it clear that he would gladly
spend the rest of the night with "mother dear," she merely waved her
hand and said:

"Come now. Take a rest, you must be tired after the journey. This is
not the time for discussion. We shall talk to-morrow."

Next morning the two sons went to kiss papa's hand, but papa refused
his hand. He lay on his bed with closed eyes, and when they entered he
cried out:

"Have you come to judge the toll-gatherer? Get out, Pharisees! Get
out!"

But in spite of this reception, Porfiry Vladimirych emerged from papa's
room agitated and with tears on his eyelids, while Pavel Vladimirych,
like "the heartless dolt" that he was, merely picked his nose.

"He is very weak, mother dear, very weak!" exclaimed Porfiry
Vladimirych, throwing himself on his mother's breast.

"Is it so bad?"

"Yes, very bad. He won't live much longer."

"Oh, well, it isn't as bad as that."

"No, dear, no. And although your life has never been too joyful, yet
as I think how Fate deals you so many blows at once, upon my word, I
wonder where you get the strength to bear up under it all."

"Well, my friend, the strength comes if such is the Lord's will. You
know what it says in the Scriptures: 'Bear one another's burdens.' It
seems that our Heavenly Father has chosen me to bear the burdens of my
family."

Arina Petrovna shut her eyes, so delightful was this vision of the
family finding their tables covered for them and of her toiling for
them and bearing their burdens.

"Yes, my friend," she said after a minute's pause, "it's a hard life I
lead in my old age. I have provided for my children, and it is time for
me to rest. It's no joke--four thousand souls! At my age to take care
of such an estate, to have an eye on everybody and everything, to run
back and forth! As for all those bailiffs and managers, they look you
straight in the eye, but, believe me, they are the most faithless kind.
And you," she interrupted herself, turning to Pavel, "what are you
digging in your nose for?"

"What have I to do with it?" snarled Pavel Vladimirych, disturbed in
the very midst of his absorbing occupation.

"What do you mean? After all, he's your father. You might find a word
of pity for him."

"Well--a father! A father like any other father. He has been that way
for ten years. You always make things unpleasant for me."

"Why in the world should I, my boy? I am your mother. Here is Porfisha.
He has found words of affection and pity for me as befits a good son,
but you don't even look at your mother properly. You look at her out of
the corner of your eye, as if she were not your mother, but your foe.
Please don't bite me."

"Well, what----"

"Stop! Hold your tongue for a minute. Let your mother say a word. Do
you remember the commandment, 'Honor thy father and thy mother, and all
will be well with thee?' Am I to understand that you don't wish to be
well?"

Pavel Vladimirych kept silence and looked at his mother in perplexity.

"You see, you're silenced," went on Arina Petrovna, "you are guilty.
But I shall let you alone. For the sake of this joyful meeting we shall
dispense with this talk. God, my child, sees everything. As for me, I
see you through and through, and I always have. Children, children, you
will remember your mother when she lies in her grave. You will remember
her, but it will be too late."

"Mamma dear!" interposed Porfiry Vladimirych. "Away with such black
thoughts, away with them!"

"We must all die," said Arina Petrovna sententiously. "These are not
black, but pious thoughts. I'm growing weak, children, oh, how weak!
Debility and ailments are the only things left of my former strength.
Even the maids have noticed it, and they don't care a rap for me. If I
say one word, they have ten in reply. I have only one threat, that I
shall complain to the young masters. That works sometimes."

Tea was served and then breakfast, during which Arina Petrovna
continued her complaining and self-pitying. After breakfast she invited
her sons to her bedroom.

When the door was locked, she went straight to the business for which
she had convoked the family council.

"Simple Simon is here," she began.

"We heard about it, mamma dear," said Porfiry Vladimirych; and it was
hard to say whether it was irony or the calm complacency of a man who
has just eaten a hearty meal that sounded in his voice.

"He has come here as if that were the proper thing to do. Whatever he
may have done, he seems to think the old mother will always have bread
for him. Think of all his hatred for me, of all the trouble his tricks
and buffoonery have caused me. And what have I not done to get him a
good berth? It all ran off like water from a duck's back. At last, I
made up my mind. Goodness, if he cannot take care of himself, am I to
ruin my life on account of the big lout? I'll give him a piece of the
property, I decided. Perhaps, I thought, once an independent proprietor
he'll sober down. No sooner said than done. I myself found a house
for him and paid out twelve thousand silver rubles for it with my own
hands. And what's the upshot? After less than three years he's hanging
round my neck again. How long am I to stand such insults?"

Porfisha lifted up his eyes and shook his head sorrowfully, as if to
say, "Fine doings. Why disturb mother dear so ruthlessly? Why not
live peacefully and quietly? Then dear mamma would not be angry. Fine
doings." But Porfisha's gestures did not please Arina Petrovna, who
objected to any interruption to the course of her thoughts.

"Wait a minute," she said, "don't shake your head. Listen first. Think
of my feelings when I learned that he had thrown away his parental
blessing like a gnawed bone into a cesspool. Think how he outraged me,
me, who for years refused myself sleep and food. He has done to his
patrimony what one would do to a bauble bought at a fair."

"Oh, mother dear, what a shame, what a shame!" began Porfiry
Vladimirych, but Arina Petrovna stopped him again.

"Wait a minute. Let me have your opinion when I order you to. If at
least the scoundrel had come to me in time and said: 'I am guilty,
dear mamma, I couldn't restrain myself,' I might have bought the house
back for a song. The unworthy son did not know how to make use of the
property. Perhaps the worthier children would. The house easily brought
in fifteen per cent. income yearly. Maybe I would have thrown him out
another thousand rubles in his distress. But instead, he disposed of
the property without so much as saying a word to me. With my own hands,
I paid out twelve thousand rubles for the house, and it was sold at
auction for eight thousand rubles!"

"The main thing, dear mamma, is that he has dealt so basely with the
parental blessing," Porfiry interjected hastily, as if afraid of being
stopped again.

"Yes, that's so, too. My money does not come lightly. I have earned it
with the sweat of my brow. When I married your father, all he owned
was the estate of Golovliovo with one hundred and one souls, and a few
more souls scattered in distant estates, a hundred and fifty in all.
As for me, I had nothing at all. Now look what an estate I have built
up on that foundation. There are four thousand souls, not a single one
less. I can't take them into the grave with me. Do you think it was an
easy task to scrape four thousand souls together? No, dear child, not
easy, far from easy. I spent many a sleepless night trying to work out
a good business scheme, so that no one should smell it out and stand in
my way. And what have I not endured in my business travels? I have had
plenty of hard road and bad weather and slippery ice. It is only lately
that I allow myself the luxury of a coach. In former times I rode in a
plain two-horse peasant's cart with a cover put on extra for me. It was
in nothing but a cart that I used to go to Moscow. And the filth and
stench I had to put up with in the Moscow inns! I begrudged myself the
dime for the cabby, and I walked all the way from Rogozhskaya Street
to Solyanka. The house-porter would say to me wonderingly: "Mistress,
they say you are young and well-to-do, why do you work so hard?" But I
was silent and patient. At first all I had at my disposal were thirty
thousand rubles in bank notes. I sold your father's remote estates with
their one hundred souls, and with what I realized from the sale I set
out to buy a property with a thousand souls. I had a mass said at the
Iverska Church and went to Solyanka to try my luck. What do you think
happened? The Holy Virgin must have seen my bitter tears. She helped
me buy the estate. It was like a miracle. The instant I bid thirty
thousand rubles the auction came to an end. There had been a lot of
noise and excitement, but then the people stopped bidding, and it was
as quiet as could be. The auctioneer got up and congratulated me. I was
dumfounded. Ivan Nikolaich, the lawyer, came over to me and said: 'Let
me congratulate you, madam, on your purchase.' But I stood there stiff
as a post. How great is God's mercy! Think of it, if in my confusion
someone had called out just for spite, 'I bid thirty-five thousand,' I
should certainly have offered every bit of forty thousand. And where
would I have gotten the money from?"

Many a time before had Arina Petrovna regaled her children with the
epical beginnings of her career of acquisition. It had never lost
the charm of novelty for them. Porfiry Vladimirych listened smiling,
sighing, turning up his eye-balls, lowering them, to the tune of the
rapid changes through which the tale passed. As for Pavel Vladimirych,
he sat with wide-open eyes, like a child, listening to a familiar, yet
ever-fascinating fairy tale.

"Do you think your mother built up her fortune without trouble?" went
on Arina Petrovna. "It takes trouble even to make a pimple on your
nose. After the first purchase I was laid up with fever for six weeks.
So judge for yourselves how it must make my heart ache to see my
hard-earned money, money I went through torments to get, you may say,
thrown out into the gutter for no earthly reason."

There was a minute's pause. Porfiry Vladimirych was ready to rend his
garments, but refrained, fearing there would be no one in the village
to mend them. Pavel Vladimirych, as soon as the fairy tale was over,
fell back into his wonted apathy, and his face resumed its customary
dull expression.

"That is why I asked you to come here," began Arina Petrovna anew. "Now
judge us, me and the villain. Whatever you decide will be done. If you
condemn him, he will be guilty. If you condemn me, I shall be guilty.
Only I shall not allow the rascal to get the better of me," she added,
quite unexpectedly.

Porfiry Vladimirych felt his turn had come, and he prepared to hold
forth, but approached the subject in a roundabout way.

"If you will permit me, dearest mother, to express my opinion," he
said, "here it is in two words: children must obey their parents,
blindly do their bidding, cherish them in their old age. That's all!
What are children, dear mother? Children are loving creatures who owe
their parents everything, from their persons to the last rag they
possess. Therefore, parents may judge children, while children may
never judge parents. Children are in duty bound to respect, not to
judge. You say: 'Judge us.' That is magnanimous of you, dear mother,
_mag_nificent! But how can we think about it without fear, we whom from
the first day of our birth you have been clothing with kindness from
head to foot? Say what you may, it would not be judgment but blasphemy.
It would be such blasphemy, such blasphemy----"

"Stop, wait a minute. If you say you cannot sit in judgment on me,
acquit me and condemn _him,_" Arina Petrovna interrupted. She was
listening and trying to search his meaning, but could not make out what
new plot was back of the Bloodsucker's mind.

"No, mother dear, even that I cannot do, or rather I don't dare to. I
have no right to. I can neither acquit nor condemn. I simply cannot
judge. You are the mother; you alone know how to deal with us children.
You have the right to reward us if we deserve it, and chastise us if we
are guilty. Our duty is not to criticise, but to obey. And if at the
moment of parental wrath you exceed the measure of justice, even then
we dare not grumble, for the ways of Providence are hidden from us. Who
knows, perhaps it was necessary. Our brother Stepan has acted basely,
unspeakably, but you alone can determine the degree of punishment he
deserves."

"Then you refuse to help me? You would have me get out of this affair
as best I can?"

"Oh, dearest, dearest, how you misunderstood me! Goodness, goodness! I
said, that however you might be pleased to dispose of brother Stepan's
fate, so shall it be, and you--what horrible thoughts you ascribe to
me."

"All right. And you?" she turned to Pavel Vladimirych.

"Do you want my opinion? But what's my opinion to you?" said he, as if
only half-awake. However, he braced himself unexpectedly and went on:
"Of course, he's guilty. Have him torn to pieces--ground to dust in a
mortar--it's settled in advance. What am I in this?"

Having mumbled these incoherent words, he stopped and stared at his
mother, his mouth wide open, as if not trusting his own ears.

"Well, my dear, I shall speak to you later," Arina Petrovna cut him off
coldly. "I see that you are anxious to tread in Stiopka's tracks. Take
care, my child. You will repent, but it will be too late."

"Why, what's the matter? I'm not saying anything. I say, just as you
please. What is there disrespectful in that?" said Pavel Vladimirych,
faintly.

"I'll talk with you later on, my boy, later on. You think because you
are an army officer, you can run wild. You are greatly mistaken. Then
neither of you wants to sit in judgment?"

"I, dearest mother----"

"What am I in this?" said Pavel Vladimirych. "I don't care. Have him
torn to pieces."

"Hold your tongue, for Christ's sake, you wicked man!" Arina Petrovna
felt she was fully entitled to call her son "scoundrel," but refrained
in deference to the joyous meeting. "Well, if you refuse to judge him I
shall. Here is my verdict. I shall try to treat him kindly once more. I
shall hand over to him the little Vologda village, have a cottage built
there, and let him live there and be fed by the peasants."

Although Porfiry Vladimirych had refused to sit in judgment on his
brother, his mother's generosity was so amazing that he felt he simply
had to point out the dangerous consequences of her project.

"Dearest mamma," he exclaimed, "you are more than magnanimous. You are
confronted by a deed--well, the vilest, meanest deed--and then you
forget and pardon. _Mag_nificent! But forgive me, I am afraid for you,
dearest. Think what you will of me, but if I were you, I wouldn't do
it."

"Why not?"

"I don't know. Perhaps I lack your magnanimity, that motherly feeling
of yours. But one thought comes back to me all the while--what if
brother Stepan does the same with his second legacy as he did with his
first?"

Arina Petrovna had already thought of that, yet in the back of her mind
was another consideration.

"The Vologda estate is father's property, it belongs to the patrimony,"
she said through her teeth. "Sooner or later a portion of the patrimony
will have to be doled out to him."

"I understand that very well, mother dear."

"Then you also understand that on giving him the Vologda village we can
make him sign a document to the effect that he has received his full
share and that he renounces all further inheritance claims."

"I understand that too, dearest mother. Your excessive kindness caused
you to commit a grave mistake. At the time you bought him the house you
ought to have made him give you such a document then."

"Yes, that was a blunder."

"At that time, in his joy, he would have signed any document. But you,
dearest, in the kindness of your heart--goodness, what a mistake! What
a mistake!"

"Don't talk of it any more. Why didn't you speak up before it was too
late? Now you are ready to blame everything on your mother, but when it
comes to business, you are not there. However, it isn't the document
I have in mind. I can make him sign it even now. Papa, I suppose,
isn't going to die at once. Until his death the blockhead must live on
something. In case he refuses to sign, we can chase him out and bid him
wait for papa's death. No, what I want to know is, do you dislike my
idea of giving him the Vologda estate?"

"He will squander away the village, darling, as he did the house."

"If he does, let him blame himself."

"He'll come back to you, again, to no one else."

"Oh, no, I won't stand for it. I won't let him come near my threshold.
There won't be a drink of water for him in my house. And people won't
condemn me for it, nor will God punish me. To squander away first a
house, then an estate! Am I his slave? Is he the only one I have to
provide for? Have I not other children?"

"Still, it is to you that he will come. Isn't he brazen-faced enough to
do that, darling mamma?"

"I tell you, I won't let him come near my threshold. Why do you sit
there croaking, 'he'll come, he'll come?' I won't let him in."

Arina Petrovna grew silent and fixed her gaze on the window. She
herself vaguely realized that the Vologda estate would only temporarily
free her from "the horrid creature," that in the end he would dispose
of it, too, and would return to her again, and that as a mother she
could not refuse him a corner in her house. But the thought that the
odious fellow would always be with her, that even though locked up in
the counting-house he would be preying on her imagination like a spook,
was so appalling that she shuddered involuntarily.

"Not for the world!" she exclaimed, striking the table with her fist
and leaping to her feet.

Meanwhile, Porfiry Vladimirych kept on staring at "mother dear" and
shaking his head rhythmically in token of condolence.

"I see you are angry, dearest mamma," he said at last in a tone so
sugared that he seemed to be getting ready to tickle Arina Petrovna.

"What would you have me do? Dance a jig?"

"Excuse me, darling, but what do the Scriptures say about patience?
'In patience,' it says, 'possess ye your souls,' 'In patience'--that's
the word. Do you think God does not see? He sees everything, mother
dear. We perhaps don't suspect anything, we sit here proposing this and
planning that, while He may already have disposed. Oh, dearest mamma,
how unjust you are to me."

But Arina Petrovna was fully aware that the Bloodsucker was throwing a
snare, and she flew into a rage.

"Are you making sport of me?" she shouted. "I am discussing business,
and he's trying to hoax me. Don't pull the wool over my eyes. Speak
plainly. Do you want him to remain at Golovliovo, hanging around his
mother's neck?"

"Just so, dearest mother, if you please. Let him be where he is and
make him sign a paper about the heritage."

"So, so. I knew that was what you would advise. All right. God alone
knows how it will pain me always to be having that creature around.
However, it seems nobody will take pity on me. When I was young I bore
my cross. Shall I refuse it in my old age? But there is still another
point. While papa and I are alive, _he'll_ live at Golovliovo, and we
won't let him starve. But how about afterwards?"

"Dearest mother! Darling! Why such melancholy thoughts?" cried the
Bloodsucker.

"Melancholy or not, still one has to provide ahead. We aren't babies.
When we die, what will become of him?"

"Dearest mother! Can't you count on us, your children? Have we not been
properly brought up by you?"

Porfiry Vladimirych flashed on her one of those puzzling glances which
had always made her uneasy, and went on:

"The poor man, dear mamma, I shall help with greater joy than the rich.
The rich man, Christ be with him, the rich man has enough of his own.
But the poor man--you know what Christ said of the poor."

Porfiry Vladimirych got up and kissed his mother's hand.

"Dearest mamma, allow me to present my brother with two pounds of
tobacco," he said entreatingly.

Arina Petrovna did not answer. She looked at him and reflected: "Is he
really such a Bloodsucker that he would turn his own brother out on the
streets?"

"Well, do as you please. Let him live at Golovliovo," she said finally,
turning to Porfiry. "You have trapped me. You started with 'just
as you please, dearest mamma,' and finished by dancing me on your
wire. But let me tell you this, I hate him and he has disgraced and
pestered me all his life, he has even dishonored my motherly blessing.
Nevertheless, if you turn him out into the streets or make a beggar of
him, you shall not have my blessing. No, no, no. Now you two go to him.
The idiot is wearing out his silly eyes looking for you."

The sons left. Arina Petrovna rose and watched them stride over the
front yard to the counting-house without exchanging a word. Porfiry was
constantly taking off his cap and crossing himself, now at the sight
of the church, which shimmered afar off, now before the chapel, now
before the wooden post to which a charity box was attached. As for
Pavel, he seemed unable to take his eyes off his boot tips shining in
the sunlight.

"For whom have I been accumulating riches? Refused myself sleep and
food--for whom?" she cried bitterly.