There are families that are weighed down by an inevitable fate. They
are frequent among that portion of the nobility which once lived idle,
useless, and uninfluential, under the wing of serfdom in all parts of
Russia and is now passing its last days helpless and unprotected in
dilapidated manor-houses. In the life of these wretched families both
success and failure come unexpectedly and as if by sheer accident.

Sometimes it happens that a shower of good luck, as it were, suddenly
comes streaming down on such a family. The ruined cornet and his wife,
peacefully fading away in an out-of-the-way village, will suddenly be
blessed with a brood of young people, strong, clean, alert, pushing,
adaptable to the new conditions of life--the boys as well as the
girls--in a word, "knowing ones." The boys pass examinations with
flying colors and even establish connections and procure patrons
while still at school. In the nick of time they exhibit their modesty
(_"j'aime cette modestie"_ their superiors say about them), and in the
nick of time they show that they can be independent (_"j'aime cette
indépendance!"_) They quickly scent the direction from which the wind
blows, but they never burn their bridges, so that retreat is free
and easy. These successful makers of our modern history begin with
obsequious cringing, and almost invariably end with perfidy. As to
the girls, they, too, in their line, contribute to the regeneration of
the family, that is, they all marry successfully and then exhibit so
much tact in the art of dressing that they experience no difficulty in
gaining prominent places in so-called society.

From this combination of circumstances, success fairly pours down upon
the impoverished family. The first successful members who struggle
through courageously, bring up another clean generation, which is still
better off because the main paths have not only been broken but also
well trodden. Other generations succeed until at last a family comes
that has no preliminary struggles and deems it has an inborn right to
lifelong rejoicing.

Lately, on account of a modern demand for so-called "new men" resulting
from the gradual degeneration of the old men, there have been frequent
instances of successful families. Even in earlier days a comet would
now and then make its appearance on the horizon, but it was a rare
occurrence, the reason being that, first, there were no cracks in the
wall surrounding that blissful region over the gateway to which is
inscribed: "Here pies are eaten daily," and, secondly, because in order
to penetrate into that region, one had to have genuine ability. But now
quite a number of cracks have appeared and the matter of penetration is
considerably simplified, since great merits are no longer demanded of
the newcomer, but only "newness" and nothing else.

Besides these lucky families there is a great multitude of families
upon whose members the household gods bestow nothing but misfortune
and despair. Like a baleful blight, vice and ill-luck beset them and
devour their substance. The malignant influences attack the whole
stock, eating their way into the very heart and laying waste generation
after generation. There is born a race of weaklings, drunkards, petty
rakes, idlers and shiftless ne'er-do-wells. As time goes on the race
degenerates more and more, until finally there appear miserable
weaklings, like Yudushka's two sons, who perish at the first onslaught
of life.

Such a sinister fate pursued the Golovliovo family. For several
generations, their history was marked by three characteristics,
idleness, utter uselessness, and habitual hard drinking, the last
coming as the sorry crown to a chaotic life. The Golovliovo family
would have run to seed completely but for the fact that Arina Petrovna
flashed like a casual meteor through this drunken confusion. By her
personal energy alone this woman brought the family to an unprecedented
height of prosperity. Nevertheless her labors were in vain. Not only
did she not transmit any of her qualities to her children, but she
herself died ensnared by idleness, empty talk and mental vacuity.

Until now Porfiry Vladimirych had held out against the temptation of
drink. It may be that he had been frightened off by the fate of his
brothers and had consciously abstained from drink, or that he had
been satisfied by the intoxication of his frenzied day dreams. But it
was not for nothing that he had the reputation of a drunkard among
his neighbors. At times he himself felt something was lacking in his
existence. Idle musings gave him much, but not all. They did not supply
that sharp, stupefying sensation which would completely do away with
his sense of reality and plunge him headlong into the void forever.

And now the long-wished-for opportunity presented itself. Ever since
Anninka's arrival, Yudushka had been aware of a vague noise at night
coming from the other end of the house. For a long time he had puzzled
his head over the significance of the mysterious sounds. At last he
discovered what they were.

Anninka expected a reprimand the next day. None came. Porfiry
Vladimirych spent the morning locked up in his study as usual, but when
he appeared at the midday meal, he poured out two wineglasses of vodka
instead of only one for himself, and pointed to one with a sheepish
smile. Anninka accepted the silent invitation.

"So you say Lubinka is dead?" said Yudushka when the dinner was well
under way, as if recalling something.

"Yes, uncle, she is dead."

"Well, God rest her soul! To grumble is a sin, but to honor her memory
is quite fitting. Shall we?"

"Yes, uncle, let's honor her memory."

They emptied one more glass, and then Yudushka grew silent. He was
evidently still unaccustomed to the society of human beings. When the
meal was over, Anninka, performing a family rite, kissed uncle's cheek,
and in response he patted her on her cheek and said:

"So that's the kind you are."

The evening of the same day, at tea, which lasted longer this time
than usual, Porfiry Vladimirych looked at his niece for a while with a
quizzical smile, and finally said:

"Shall we have some corned meats served?"

"Well, if you wish."

"Yes. It's better you should do it in uncle's sight than on the sly. At
least, uncle will----"

Yudushka did not finish the sentence. Perhaps he had wanted to say that
uncle would keep her from drinking, but something prevented him from
saying it.

From that time on cold cuts were served in the dining-room every
evening. The outer window shutters were closed, the servants retired,
and uncle and niece remained all alone. In the beginning Yudushka did
not keep pace with Anninka, but with a little practice he came up to
her. They sat slowly sipping their vodka and talking. The conversation,
at first dull and indifferent, became more and more animated as their
heads grew hotter, and invariably passed into a chaotic quarrel, at
the bottom of which were always reminiscences about the victims of
Golovliovo.

Anninka started the quarrels. She dug up the family archives with
ruthless persistence and delighted in teasing Yudushka by arguing that
he along with Arina Petrovna had been the chief cause of the Golovliovo
tragedies. Every word breathed such cynicism and such burning hatred
that it was difficult to understand how so much vitality could still
exist in that worn-out, shattered body. Anninka's attacks galled
Yudushka immensely, but he defended himself feebly, angrily sputtering
ejaculations of discomfiture. At times, when Anninka went too far in
her insolence, he shouted and cursed.

Such scenes repeated themselves day in, day out, without change. Every
detail of the pitiful family chronicle was speedily exhausted, but it
still held the minds of the two riveted. Every episode of the past
lacerated some wound in their hearts, and they felt a bitter delight
in constantly evoking, scrutinizing and exaggerating painful memories.
Neither the past nor the present contained any moral mainstay on which
Anninka could lean. Nothing but sordid stinginess on one side, and
mental vacuity on the other. Her youthful heart had thirsted for warmth
and love, but had received a stone instead of bread, blows instead of
instruction. By the irony of fate, the cruel school in which she had
been taught implanted in her not an austere attitude toward life, but a
passionate yearning to partake of its sweet poisons. Youth had wrought
the miracle of oblivion, it kept her heart from hardening and the germs
of hatred from developing. Youth had made her drunk with the thirst for
life. That was why a turbulent, furtive debauchery had held her in its
sway for several years, and had pushed Golovliovo into the background.
Now, when the end was drawing close, her heart began to ache. Now for
the first time did Anninka grasp the significance of her past and begin
to hate it truly.

The drinking lasted far into the night, and had it not been for the
drunken confusion of both thoughts and words, it might have resulted in
something frightful. But if alcohol opened the well-springs of pain in
these shattered hearts, it also appeased them. The further the night
advanced, the more incoherent became their talk and the more impotent
their hatred. Toward the end of the debauch, the aching disappeared and
their surroundings vanished from their eyes, supplanted by a shining
void. They faltered, their eyes closed, they grew muscle-bound. Uncle
and niece would then rise from their places and retire to their rooms
with tottering steps.

Of course, these night adventures could not remain a secret. Before
long the notion of crime became associated with them in the minds of
the servants. Life abandoned the vast Golovliovo manor-house. Nothing
stirred even in the morning. Uncle and niece rose late and till the
midday meal Anninka's racking cough, accompanied by curses, rang from
one end of the house to the other. Yudushka listened to the harrowing
sounds in terror and a vague presentiment of his own impending doom
stirred in him.

It seemed that all the Golovliovo victims were now creeping from out of
the nooks and crannies of the deserted house. Gray apparitions stirred
everywhere. Here was old Vladimir Mikhailovich, in his white nightcap,
making wry faces and citing Barkov; here was Simple Simon and Pavel
the Sneak; here were Lubinka and the last offshoots of the Golovliovo
stock, Volodya and Petka. All were drunk, lustful, weary and bleeding.
And over all these ghosts there brooded a living phantom, Porfiry
Vladimirych Golovliov, the last representative of the decadent family.