Petenka walked in looking flabby and dispirited, kissed his father's
hand, observed the same ceremony with his grandmother, then bowed
to Yevpraksia, and sat down. He was about twenty-five, rather
good-looking, in an army officer's travelling uniform. That was all one
could say about him. Even Yudushka knew scarcely more. The relations
of father and son were not of the kind one could call strained. There
simply were no relations, you might say. Yudushka knew Petenka to be a
man who in the eyes of the law was his son and to whom he had to send a
certain allowance determined by Yudushka himself, in consideration of
which he was entitled to homage and obedience. Petenka, on the other
hand, knew that he had a father who could make things unpleasant for
him at any time he wished. He made trips to Golovliovo quite willingly,
especially since he had become a commissioned officer, not because he
greatly enjoyed his father's company, but simply because every man who
is not clearly conscious of his aim in life instinctively gravitates
to his native place. But now, apparently, he had come because he had
been obliged to come, and consequently manifested not a single sign
of the joyous perplexity with which every prodigal son of the gentry
celebrates his arrival home. Petenka was not talkative.

All his father's ejaculations of pleasant surprise were met with
silence, or a forced smile, and when Yudushka asked, "Why did it occur
to you all of a sudden?" he answered even crossly, "It just occurred to
me and here I am."

"Well, thank you, thank you for remembering your father. I am glad you
came. I suppose you thought of grandmother, too?"

"Yes, I thought of grandmother, too."

"Hold on! Maybe you recollected that today is the Anniversary of your
brother Volodenka's death?"

"Yes, I thought of that, too."

Thus the conversation went for about half an hour, so that it was
impossible to tell whether Petenka were answering or dodging the
questions. So, in spite of Yudushka's tolerance of his children's
indifference to him, he could not refrain from remarking:

"Well, my child, you are not affectionate. One could hardly call you an
affectionate son!"

Had Petenka kept silence this time also, had he taken his father's
remark meekly, or better still, had he kissed his father's hand and
said, "Excuse me, father dear, you know I am tired from the journey,"
things would have passed off pleasantly. But Petenka behaved like an
ungrateful child.

"Yes, that's what I am," he answered gruffly. "Let me alone, please."

Then Porfiry Vladimirych felt so hurt, so wounded that he could not
keep quiet any longer.

"To think of the pains I have taken for your sake!" he said, with
bitterness. "Even here I never stop thinking how to improve this and
that, so that you may be comfortable and cozy, and suffer no lack, and
have no worry. And all of you fight shy of me."

"Who is 'all of you'?"

"Well, you. And the deceased, too, may his soul rest in peace, he was
just the same."

"Well, I am grateful to you."

"I don't see your gratitude--neither gratitude nor affection--nothing."

"I'm not affectionate--that's all. But you speak in the plural all the
time. One of us is dead already."

"Yes, he is dead. God punished him. God punishes disobedient children.
Still, I remember him. He was unruly, but I remember him. Tomorrow, you
see, we shall have the memorial services performed. He offended me,
but I, notwithstanding, remember my duty. Lord! The sort of thing that
goes on these days! Here a son comes to his father and snarls at the
very first word. Is that how we acted in our days? I remember we used
to come to Golovliovo, and when we were thirty versts away, we began
to shiver in our boots. Well, here is mother dear, a live witness, she
will tell you. And nowadays. I don't understand it. I don't understand
it."

"I don't either. I came quietly, greeted you, kissed your hand and
now I sit here and don't bother you. I drink tea, and if you give me
supper, I'll have my supper. Why did you raise all this fuss?"

Arina Petrovna sat in her chair listening attentively. She seemed to
be hearing the same old familiar tale that had begun long, long ago,
time out of mind. Aware that such a meeting of father and son foreboded
no good, she considered it her duty to intervene and put in a word of
reconciliation:

"Well, well, you turkey-cocks!" she said, trying to give the situation
a humorous turn. "Just met and already quarreling. Look at them jumping
at each other, look at them! Feathers will soon be flying. My, my, how
naughty! Why don't you fellows sit down quietly and properly and have
a friendly chat, and let your old mother enjoy it, too? Petenka, you
give in. My child, you must always give in to your father, because he
is your father. Even if at times father gives you bitter medicine, take
it without complaint, with obedience, with respect, because you are his
son. Who knows, maybe the bitter medicine will turn sweet--so it will
be to your good. And you, Porfiry Vladimirych, come down from your high
perch. He is your son, young, delicate. He has made seventy-five versts
over hollows and snow-drifts, he is tired, and chilled, and sleepy. We
are through with the tea now, suppose you order supper and then let's
all go to bed. So, my friend. We'll all go to our nooks and offer up
a prayer, and maybe our temper will pass away. And then we'll rise
early in the morning and pray for Volodya's soul. We'll have a memorial
service performed, and then we'll go home and have a talk. Both of you
will be rested and you'll state your affairs in a clear, orderly way.
Petenka, you will tell us about St. Petersburg and you, Porfiry, about
your country life. And now, let's have supper and to bed!"

The exhortation had its effect not because it was convincing but
because Yudushka himself saw he had gone too far and it would be best
to end the day peacefully. He rose from his seat, kissed his mother's
hand, thanked her for the "lesson," and ordered supper.

The meal was eaten in morose silence. Then they left the dining-room
and went to their rooms. Little by little the house became still. The
dead quiet crept from room to room and finally reached the study
of the Golovliovo master. Having finished the required number of
genuflexions before the ikons, Yudushka, too, went to bed.

Porfiry Vladimirych lay in bed, but was unable to shut his eyes. He
felt his son's arrival portended something unusual, and various absurd
sermons already rose in his mind. Yudushka's harangues had the merit of
being good for all occasions and did not consist of a connected chain
of thoughts, but came to him in the shape of fragmentary aphorisms.
Whenever confronted by an extraordinary situation, such a flood of
aphorisms overwhelmed him that even sleep could not drive them from his
consciousness.

He could not fall asleep. He was a prey to his absurd sermonizings,
though, as a matter of fact, he was not much perturbed by Petenka's
mysterious arrival. He was prepared for no matter what happened. He
knew nothing would catch him napping and nothing would make him recede
in the slightest from the web of empty, musty aphorisms in which he
was entangled. For him there existed neither sorrow nor joy, neither
hatred, nor love. To him the entire world was a vast coffin which
served him as a pretext for endless prattling.

What greater grief could there be for a father than for his son to
commit suicide? But even with respect to Volodya's suicide he remained
true to himself. It had been a very sad story, which had lasted two
years. For two years Volodya had held out, at first showing a pride
and determination not to ask his father's aid. Then he weakened, began
to implore, to expostulate, to threaten. In reply he always received
a ready aphorism, the stone given to the hungry man. It is doubtful
whether Yudushka realized that he had handed his son a stone and not
bread. At any rate a stone was all he had to give, and so he gave it.
When Volodya shot himself he had a requiem service performed, entered
the day of his death in the calendar, and promised himself to have
memorial services performed on the 23rd of November of every year.
Sometimes a dull voice muttered in his ears that the solution of a
family quarrel by suicide is rather a questionable method, to say the
least; and even then he brought into play a train of aphorisms, such as
"God punishes disobedient children," "God is against the proud," and
was at peace again.

And now! There was no doubt that something sinister had happened to
Petenka. But whatever had happened, he, Porfiry Vladimirych, must be
above those chance happenings. "You knew how to get in, then know how
to get out." "If the cat wants the fish, let her wet her feet." Just
so. That is what he would say to his son the next day, no matter what
Petenka told him. And suppose Petenka, like Volodya, were also to
refuse to take a stone instead of bread? What if he, too----Yudushka
drove the thought from him. It was a diabolical suggestion. He tossed
about and tried in vain to fall asleep. Whenever sleep seemed about
to come, there flashed across his mind maxims such as "I should like
to reach the sky but my arms are too short," or "You can't stretch
more than the length of your bed," or "Speed is good for nothing but
catching fleas."

Twaddle surrounded him on all sides, crawled upon him, crept over him,
embraced him. Under this load of nonsensicality, with which he hoped to
regale his soul tomorrow, he could not fall asleep.

Nor could Petenka find sleep, though the journey had tired him
exceedingly. He had an affair that could not be settled anywhere
except at Golovliovo, but it was a situation of such a nature that
he did not know how to meet it. Petenka, indeed, realized full well
that his case was hopeless and his trip to Golovliovo would only add
to the difficulties of his situation. But the primitive instinct of
self-preservation in man overcomes all reason and urges him on to try
everything to the very last straw. That's why he had come. But instead
of hardening himself so as to be prepared for whatever might come, he
had almost from the first word got into a quarrel with his father. What
would be the outcome of this trip? Would a miracle happen? Would stone
turn into bread? Would it not have been simpler to put the revolver to
his temple and say, "Gentlemen, I am unworthy of wearing your uniform.
I have embezzled crown money and I pronounce a just, though severe
sentence upon myself"? Bang! And all is over. The deceased Lieutenant
Golovliov is hereby struck off the list of officers. Yes, how radical
that would be and--how beautiful! The comrades would say, "You were
unfortunate, you went too far, still you were an honorable man."

But instead of acting that way at once, he had brought the affair to
a point where it became a matter of common knowledge; and then he
had been given leave of absence for a fixed time on condition that
within that time he would refund the embezzled sum. If not--out of the
regiment! The disgraceful end of his early career! So he had come to
Golovliovo, though he knew full well that he would be given a stone
instead of bread.

But perhaps a miracle would come to change things. Miracles sometimes
happen. Perhaps the present Golovliovo would vanish and a new
Golovliovo would arise, in which he might----And perhaps grandmother
would--hadn't she money? Maybe, if he told her he was in great trouble,
she might give him some. Who could tell? "Here," she might say, "hurry,
so that you get back before the time is up."

And he rode fast, fast--hurried the driver, just made the train and got
to the regiment two hours before the respite was over. "Good for you,
Golovliov," his comrades would say, "your hand, honorable young man!
Let's forget the matter." And he not only remained in the regiment, but
was even promoted to staff-captain, then captain, after that adjutant
of the regiment (he had been bursar, already) and, finally, on the
anniversary day of the regiment----Ah, if only the night would pass
quickly! Tomorrow--well, let happen what may tomorrow. But what he
would have to listen to! Gods, what would he not be told! Tomorrow--but
why tomorrow? He had a whole day yet. He asked for two days just
because he wanted to have enough time to move "him." A likely chance! A
fine prospect of persuading and touching him! No use----

Here his thoughts became confused and sank, one after the other, into
the mist of sleep. In a few minutes the Golovliovo manor was steeped in
heavy slumber.

The next day the whole household was up early in the morning. Everybody
went to church except Petenka, who pleaded fatigue. They listened to
the mass and the requiem and returned home. Petenka, as usual, came
up to kiss his father's hand, but Yudushka extended it sidewise, and
everyone noticed that he did not even make the sign of the cross over
his son. Tea was served, then _kutya._ Yudushka was dismal, scraped
the floor with his feet, avoided conversation, sighed, folded his
hands incessantly as if for inner prayer, and never once looked at his
son. Petenka, for his part, bristled up and smoked one cigarette after
another. The strained situation of yesterday, so far from relaxing,
became still more acute. It made Arina Petrovna very uneasy, and she
decided to find out from Yevpraksia if anything had happened.

"Has anything happened," she asked, "that makes them look daggers at
each other like that?"

"How do I know? I don't interfere in their private affairs," the girl
snapped back.

"Maybe it's on account of you. Perhaps my grandson is running after you
too?"

"Why should he run after me? A little while ago he tried to catch hold
of me in the corridor, and Porfiry Vladimirych saw him."

"Oh. So that's what it is."

In fact, in spite of his critical situation, Petenka had not lost
a bit of his levity. His eyes riveted themselves on Yevpraksia's
powerful back and he determined to let her know about it. That was
the real reason he had not gone to church, hoping Yevpraksia, as the
housekeeper, would stay home. So, when the house had turned silent,
he had thrown his cloak over his shoulders and hidden himself in the
corridor. A minute or two passed, the door of the maids' room banged,
and Yevpraksia appeared at the other end of the corridor, carrying a
tray with a butter-cake to be served with the tea. Petenka struck her
between the shoulder-blades and said, "A wonderful back you've got!"
and that instant the dining-room door opened and his father appeared.

"You, scoundrel! If you came here to behave in a nasty way, I'll throw
you down the stairs!" Yudushka hissed venomously.

Naturally, Petenka vanished in a moment. He could not fail to realize
that the incident of the morning was scarcely likely to improve his
case. So he decided to be silent and postpone the explanation until the
morrow. Nevertheless he did nothing to allay his father's irritation;
on the contrary, he behaved in a foolish, unguarded manner, smoking
cigarettes incessantly, heedless of his father's energetically fanning
away the clouds of smoke that filled the room; and every now and
then making sheep's eyes at Yevpraksia, who smiled queerly under the
influence of his glances. Yudushka noticed that, too.

The day dragged on slowly. Arina Petrovna tried to play fool with
Yevpraksia, but nothing came of it. No one felt like playing or
talking; they could not even think of small talk, though everyone had
stores of this merchandise. At last dinner time came. But dinner passed
in silence also. After dinner Arina Petrovna made preparations for
returning to Pogorelka. But this intention of his "mother dear" alarmed
Yudushka.

"God bless you, darling!" he exclaimed. "Do you mean to say you'll
leave me here alone with this--this wicked son? No, no, don't think of
it. I won't allow it."

"But what is the matter? Has anything happened between the two of you?
Why don't you tell me?" she asked.

"No, nothing has happened--as yet, but you'll see. No, please don't
go! Be present at----There is something behind his coming here in such
a hurry. So, if anything happens--you be the witness."

Arina Petrovna shook her head and decided to stay.

After dinner Porfiry Vladimirych retired, having first sent Yevpraksia
to the village priest, and Arina Petrovna also went to her room and
dozed off in her easy-chair.

Petenka thought it the most favorable time to try his luck with
grandmother, and went to her room.

"What is the matter? Have you come to play a game of fool with an old
woman?" she asked.

"No, granny, I am on business."

"Well, what is your business? Tell me."

Petenka hesitated a minute, then blurted out:

"I lost crown money at cards."

Arina Petrovna's eyes grew dim from the shock.

"Much?" she asked in a frightened voice, staring at him.

"Three thousand."

For a moment both were silent. Arina Petrovna looked around restlessly,
as if expecting somebody to come to her rescue.

"Do you know they can send you to Siberia for that?" she said at last.

"Yes, I know."

"Poor fellow!"

"Granny, I meant to borrow it from you. I'll pay good interest."

Arina Petrovna became thoroughly frightened.

"Oh no, no!" she protested. "I have only enough money for my coffin and
memorial prayers. It's my granddaughters that keep me a-going, and my
son, too. No, no, no! You'd better let me alone. Let me see--why not
ask your papa?"

"Oh, well, you can't squeeze blood out of an onion. All my hope was in
you, granny."

"Just think of what you are saying. I would gladly do it, but where am
I to get the money from? I have no money at all. But suppose you ask
father, you know, affectionately, respectfully. 'Here, father dear,
such is the case. I know I am guilty, I am young and I made a blunder.'
You know, with a smile and a laugh. Kiss his hand and fall on your
knees, and cry a bit. He likes it. Then maybe father will untie his
purse for his sonny dear."

"So you really think it's worth trying? Just a moment. See here,
granny, suppose you say to him, 'If you don't give him the money I'll
lay a curse on you!' He has always been afraid of your curse, you know."

"No, why curse? You can ask right out. Do ask him, my dear. There is no
harm if you bow before your father once too many. He will understand
your position, you know. Do it. Be sure to do it."

Petenka, his arms akimbo, walked back and forth as if deliberating.
Finally he halted and said:

"No, I won't. He is not likely to give it--it's no use. No matter what
I do, even if I smash my head in bowing--he won't do it. But you see,
if you threatened him with your curse. What am I to do, granny?"

"I don't know, really. Try and perhaps you'll soften him a bit. How
did you come to take such liberties? To lose crown money is no small
matter. Did anybody inveigle you into it?"

"It just happened. I took it and lost it at cards. Well, if you have
no money of your own, give me some of the orphans'."

"What is the matter with you? Have you lost your wits? How can I let
you have the orphans' money? No, no, I can't. Don't talk to me about
it, for Christ's sake."

"So you won't. Too bad. And I would pay good interest. Do you want five
per cent. per month? No? Well, double the principal in a year?"

"Don't you tempt me!" shouted Arina Petrovna, throwing up her hands.
"Leave me alone, for Christ's sake! It won't surprise me if father
hears us and says I urged you on! Oh, Lord! I am an old woman, I wanted
to rest a bit. I had just dozed off and then he comes with such an
offer."

"Very well, then. I am going. So it's impossible? Very good. Just like
kinsfolk. On account of three thousand rubles your grandson will go to
Siberia. Don't forget to have a Te Deum sung when I go."

Petenka left the room, closing the door with a bang. One of his flimsy
hopes was gone. What was he to do next? Only one way out was left--to
confess all to father. Who knows, perhaps, perhaps, something would----

"I'll go at once and be done with it," he said to himself. "Or no! What
can I hope for? Better tomorrow. Yes, I think tomorrow is better. I'll
tell him and leave at once." So he decided. Tomorrow would see and end
it all.

After the talk with grandmother the evening dragged on still more
slowly. Even Arina Petrovna grew silent after she had learned the real
cause of Petenka's arrival. Yudushka tried to be jocular with mother,
but perceiving she was absorbed in her own thoughts, also grew silent.
Petenka did nothing but smoke. At supper Porfiry Vladimirych asked him:

"Are you going to tell me at last why you have honored me with this
visit?"

"I will tell you tomorrow," answered Petenka morosely.