From that time forth she lived in him alone, while he, for his part,
racked his brains to avoid incurring the loss of her esteem. Whenever
she detected in his soul--and she could probe that soul very deeply--the
least trace of its former characteristics, she would work for him to
heap himself with reproaches for his lethargy and fear of life. Just
as he was about to yawn, as he was actually opening his mouth for the
purpose, her astonished glance would transfix him, and cause his mouth
to snap with a click which jarred his teeth. Still more did he hasten
to resume his alacrity whenever he perceived that his lassitude was
communicating itself to her, and threatening to render her cold
and contemptuous. Instantly he would undergo a revival of strenuous
activity; and then the shadow between them would disappear, and mutual
sympathy once more beat in strong, clear accord. Yet this solicitude on
his part had not, as yet, its origin in the magic ring of love. Indeed,
the effect of his charmed toils was negative rather than positive. True,
he no longer slept all day--on the contrary, he rode, read, walked, and
even thought of resuming his writing and his agricultural schemes;
yet the ultimate direction, the inmost significance, of his life
still remained confined to the sphere of good intentions. Particularly
disturbing did he find it whenever Olga plied him with some particular
question or another, and demanded of him, as of a professor, full
satisfaction of her curiosity. This occurred frequently, and arose not
out of pedantry on her part, but out of a desire to know the right and
the wrong of things.

At times a given question would absorb her even to the point of
forgetting her consideration for Oblomov. For instance, on one occasion,
when she had besought his opinion concerning double stars, and he
was incautious enough to refer her to Herschel, he was dispatched to
purchase the great authority's book, and commanded to read it through,
and to explain the same to her full satisfaction. On another occasion he
was rash enough to let slip a word or two concerning various schools
of painting; wherefore he had to undergo another week's reading and
explaining, and also to pay sundry visits to the Hermitage Museum. In
the end how he trembled whenever she asked him a question!

"Why do you not say something?" she would say to him. "Surely it cannot
be that the subject wearies you?"

"No, but how I love you!" he would reply, as though awakening from a
trance; to which she would retort--

"Do you really? But that is not what I have just asked you."

On another occasion he said to her--

"Cannot you see what is taking place in me? To me, speaking is a
difficulty. Give me your hand, give me your hand! There seems to be
something hindering me, something weighing me down. It is a something
that is like the great rock which oppresses a man during deep sorrow.
And, strangely enough, the effect of it is the same whether I happen
to be sad or gay. Somehow my breath seems to hurt me as I draw it,
and occasionally I come near to weeping. Yet, like a man overcome with
grief, I feel that I should be lightened and relieved if I could weep.
What, think you, is amiss with me?"

She looked at him with a smile of happiness which nothing could disturb.
Evidently no weight was pressing upon _her_ heart.

"Shall I tell you?" she said. "Yes."

"You are in love."

He kissed her hand.

"And you?" he asked. "Are _you_ in love?"

"In love?" she repeated. "I do not like the term for myself. I like you:
that is better."

"'I like you'?" he re-echoed. "But a mother or a father or a nurse or
even a dog may be _liked_: the phrase may be used as a garment, even as
can, can--"

"Even as can an old dressing-gown," she suggested with a smile.
Presently she added--

"Whether I am actually in love with you or not I hardly know. Perhaps
it is a stage that has not yet arrived. All I know is that I have
never liked father or mother or nurse or dog as I like you. I feel lost
without you. To be parted from you for a short while makes me sorry; to
be parted from you for a long while makes me sad; and, were you to die,
I should wear mourning for the rest of my life, and never again be able
to smile. To me such love is life, and life is----"

"Yes?"

"Is a duty, an obligation. Consequently love also is a duty. God has
sent me that duty, and has bid me perform it." As she spoke she raised
her eyes to heaven.

"Who can have inspired her with these ideas?" Oblomov thought to
himself. "Neither through experience nor through trial nor through 'fire
and smoke' can she have attained this clear, simple conception of life
and of love."

"Then, since there is joy in life, is there also suffering?" he asked
aloud.

"I do not know," she replied. "That lies beyond my experience as much as
it lies beyond my understanding."

"But how well _I_ understand it!"

"Ah!" she said merrily. "What glances you throw at me sometimes! Even my
aunt has noticed it."

"But how can there be joy in love if it never brings one moments of
ecstatic delight?"

"What?" she replied with a glance at the scene around her. "Is not all
_this_ so much ecstatic delight?" She looked at him, smiled, and gave
him her hand. "Do you think," she continued, "that presently I shall not
be sorry when you take your leave? Do you think that I shall not go to
bed the earlier in order that I may the sooner fall asleep, and cheat
the wearisome night, and be able to see you again in the morning?"
 The light in Oblomov's face had become brighter and brighter with each
successive question, and his gaze more and more suffused with radiance.