In the Veaborg Quarter peace and quietness reigned supreme. They
reigned in its unwashed streets, with their wooden sidewalks, and in
its lean gardens amid the nettle-encumbered ditches, where a goat with
a ragged cord around its neck was diligently engaged in cropping the
herbage and snatching dull intervals of slumber. At midday, however,
the high, smart boots of a clerk clattered along a sidewalk, the muslin
curtain at a window was pulled aside to admit the features of a Civil
Service official's lady, and for a brief moment there showed itself
over a garden fence the fresh young face of a girl--then the face of
a companion--then the face which had first appeared, as two maidens
laughed and tittered during the process cf swinging each other on a
garden swing.

Also in the abode of Oblomov's landlady all was quiet. Had you entered
the little courtyard, you would have happened upon an idyllic scene. The
poultry would have started running hither and thither in fussy alarm,
and the dogs given tongue in furious accents, while Akulina would have
paused in her pursuit of milking the cow, and the _dvornik_ in his task
of chopping firewood, in order that they might gaze unhampered at the
visitor. "Whom do you wish to see?" the _dvornik_ would have inquired;
and on your mentioning Oblomov's name, or that of the mistress of the
house, he would have pointed to the steps of the front door, and then
resumed his task of wood-chopping; whereupon the visitor would have
followed the neat, sanded path to the steps (which he would have found
covered with a plain, clean carpet of some sort), and, reaching for the
brightly polished knob of the doorbell, would have had the door opened
to him by Anisia, one of the children, the landlady herself, or Zakhar.
Everything in Agafia Matvievna's establishment smacked of an opulence
and a domestic sufficiency which had been lacking in the days when
she had shared house with her brother, Tarantiev's bosom friend.
The kitchen, the lumber-room, and the pantry were alike fitted with
cupboards full of china, crockery, and household wares of every sort;
while in cases were set out Oblomov's plate and articles of silver (long
ago redeemed, and never since pledged). In short, the place abounded
in such commodities as are to be found in the abode of every frugal
housewife. Also, so carefully was everything packed in camphor and other
preservatives that when Agafia Matvievna went to open the doors of the
cupboards she could scarcely stand against the overwhelming perfume of
mingled narcotics which came forth, and had to turn her head aside for
a few moments. Hams hung from the ceiling of the storeroom (to avoid
damage by mice), and, with them, cheeses, loaves-of--sugar, dried fish,
and bags of nuts and preserved mushrooms. On a table stood tubs of
butter, pots of sour cream, baskets of apples, and God knows what else
besides, for it would require the pen of a scribe Homer to describe
in full, and in detail, all that had become accumulated in the various
corners and on the various floors of this little nest of domestic life.
As for the kitchen, it was a veritable palladium of activity on the part
of the mistress and her efficient assistant, Anisia. Everything was kept
indoors and in its proper place; throughout there prevailed a system of
orderliness and cleanliness; and only into one particular nook of the
house did a ray of light, a breath of air, the good housewife's eye, and
the nimble, all-furbishing hand of the domestic never penetrate. That
nook was Zakhar's den. Lacking a window, it was so constantly plunged
in darkness that its resemblance to a lair rather than to a human
habitation was rendered the more complete. Whenever Zakhar surprised in
his den the mistress of the house (come thither to plan a cleaning or
various improvements) he explained to her, in forcible terms, that it
was not a woman's business to sweep out a place where faggots, blacking,
and boots ought to lie, and that it mattered not a jot that clothes
should be tossed in a heap on the floor, or that the bed in the stove
corner had become overspread with dust, seeing that it was he, and not
she, whose function it was to repose upon that bed. As for a besom, a
few planks, a couple of bricks, the remains of a barrel, and two blocks
of wood which he always kept in his room, he could not, he averred, get
on in his domestic duties without them (though why that was so he left
to the imagination). Finally, according to his own statement, neither
the dust nor the cobwebs in the least inconvenienced him--to which he
begged to add a reminder that, since he never obtruded his nose into
the kitchen, he should be the more pleased if he could be left alone by
those to whom the kitchen was at all times open. Once, when he surprised
Anisia in his sanctum, he threatened her so furiously with uplifted fist
that the case was referred to the court of superior instance--that is
to say, to Oblomov himself, who walked supinely to the door of the
den, inserted his head therein, scanned the apartment and its contents,
sneezed, and returned mutely to his own quarters.

"What have you gained by it all?" said Zakhar to the mistress and
her myrmidon, who had accompanied Oblomov, in the hope that his
participation in the affair would lead to a change of some sort. Then
the old valet laughed to himself in a way which twisted his eyebrows and
whiskers askew.

In the other rooms of the house, however, everything looked bright and
clean and fresh. The old stuff curtains had disappeared, and the doors
and windows of the drawing-room and the study were hung with blue and
green drapery and muslin curtains--the work of Agafia Matvievna's own
hands. Indeed, for days at a time Oblomov, prone upon his sofa, had
watched her bare elbows flicker to and fro as she plied needle and
thread; nor had he once gone to sleep to the sound of thread being
alternately inserted and bitten off, as had been his custom in the old
days at Oblomovka.

"Enough of work," he had nevertheless said to her at intervals, "Pray
cease your labours for a while."

"Nay," she had always replied, "God loves those who toil."

Nor was his coffee prepared for him with less care, attention, and skill
than had been the case before he had changed his old quarters for his
present ones. Giblet soup, macaroni with Parmesan cheese, soup concocted
of _kvass_ and herbs, home-fed pullets--all these dishes succeeded one
another in regular rotation, and by so doing helped to make agreeable
breaks in the otherwise monotonous routine of the little establishment.
Nor did the sun, whenever shining, fail to brighten his room from
morning till night--thanks to the fact that the market-gardens on either
side of the building prevented that luminary's rays from being shaded
off by any obstacle. Outside, ducks quacked cheerfully, while, within, a
geranium, added to a few hyacinths which the children had brought home,
filled the little apartment with a perfume which mingled pleasantly with
the smoke of Havana cigars and the scent of the cinnamon or the vanilla
which the mistress of the house would be preparing with bare, energetic
arms.

Thus Oblomov lived in a sort of gilded cage--a cage within which, as in
a diorama, the only changes included alternations of day and night and
of the seasons. Of changes of the disturbing kind which stir up the
sediment from the bottom of life's bowl--a sediment only too frequently
both bitter and obnoxious--there were none. Ever since the day when
Schtoltz had cleared him of debt, and Tarantiev and Tarantiev's friend
had taken themselves off for good, every adverse element had disappeared
from Oblomov's existence, and there surrounded him only good, kind,
sensible folk who had agreed to underpin his existence with theirs, and
to help him not to notice it, nor to feel it, as it pursued its even
course. Everything was, as it were, at peace, and of that peace, that
inertia, Oblomov represented the complete, the natural, embodiment and
expression. After passing in review and considering his mode of life,
he had sunk deeper and deeper therein, until finally he had come to the
conclusion that he had no farther to go, and nothing farther to
seek, and that the ideal of his life would best be preserved where he
was--albeit without poetry, without those finer shades wherewith his
imagination had once painted for him a spacious, careless course
of manorial life on his own estate and among his own peasantry and
servants.

Upon his present mode of life he looked as a continuation of the
Oblomovkan existence (only with a different colouring of locality, and,
to a certain extent, of period). Here, as at Oblomovka, he had succeeded
in escaping life, in driving a bargain with it, and ensuring to himself
an inviolable seclusion. Inwardly he congratulated himself on having
left behind him the irksome, irritating demands and menaces cf mundane
existence--on having placed a great distance between himself and the
horizon where there may be seen flashing the lightning-bolts of keen
pleasure, and whence come the thunderpeals of sudden affliction, and
where flicker the false hopes and the splendid visions of average
happiness, and where independence of thought gradually engulfs and
devours a man, and where passion slays him outright, and where the
intellect fails or triumphs, and where humanity engages in constant
warfare, and leaves the field of battle in a state of exhaustion and of
ever-unsatisfied, ever-insatiable desire. Never having experienced the
consolations to be won in combat, he had none the less renounced them,
and felt at ease only in a remote corner to which action and lighting
and the actual living of life were alike strangers.

Yet moments there were when his imagination stirred within him again,
and when there recurred to his mind forgotten memories and unrealized
dreams, and when he felt in his conscience whispered reproaches for
having made of his life so little as he had done. And whenever that
occurred he slept restlessly, awoke at intervals, leaped out of bed,
and shed chill tears of hopelessness over the bright ideal that was now
extinguished for ever. He shed them as folk shed them over a dead friend
whom with bitter regret they recognize to have been neglected during his
lifetime. Then he would glance at his surroundings, hug to himself
his present blessings, and grow comforted on noting how quietly, how
restfully, the sun was rising amid a blaze of glory. Thus he had come to
a decision that not only was his life compounded in the best manner for
expressing the possibilities to which the idealistic-peaceful side of
human existence may attain, but also that it had been expressly created
for and preordained to, that purpose. To others, he reflected, let it
fall to express life's restless aspects; to others let it be given to
exercise forces of construction and destruction; to each man be allotted
his true _métier_.

Such the philosophy which our Plato of Oblomovka elaborated for the
purpose of lulling himself to sleep amid the problems and the stern
demands of duty and of destiny. He had been bred and nourished to play
the part, not of a gladiator in the arena but of a peaceful onlooker
at the struggle. Never could his diffident, lethargic spirit have faced
either the raptures or the blows of life. Hence he expressed only one
of its aspects, and had no mind either to succeed in it, or to change
anything in it, or to repent of his decision. As the years flowed on
both emotion and repining came to manifest themselves at rarer and rarer
intervals, until, by quiet, imperceptible degrees, he became finally
interned in the plain, otiose tomb of retirement which he had fashioned
with his own hands, even as desert anchorites who have turned from
the world dig for themselves a material sepulchre. Of reorganizing his
estate, and removing thither with his household; he had given up all
thought. The steward whom Schtoltz had placed in charge of Oblomovka
regularly sent him the income therefrom, and the peasantry proffered
him flour and poultry at Christmastide, and everything on the estate was
prospering.

Meanwhile he ate heartily and much, even as he had done at Oblomovka.
Also, he walked and worked sluggishly and little--again, as he had done
at Oblomovka. Lastly, in spite of his advancing years, he drank beer and
_vodka à raisin_ with complete _insouciance_, and took to sleeping ever
more and more protractedly after dinner.

But suddenly a change occurred. One day, after his usual quota of
slumber and day dreams, he tried to rise from the sofa, but failed,
and his tongue refused to obey him. Terrified, he could compass only a
gesture when he tried to call for help. Had he been living with Zakhar
alone, he might have continued to signal for assistance until next
morning, or have died, and not been found there till the following day;
but, as it was, the eyes of his landlady had been watching over him like
the eyes of Providence itself, and it cost her no skill of wit, but only
an instinct of the heart, to divine that all was not well with Oblomov.
No sooner had the instinct dawned upon her than Anisia was dispatched
in a cab for a doctor, while Agafia Matvievna herself applied ice to the
patient's head, and extracted from her medicine chest the whole armoury
of smelling-bottles and fomentations which custom and report had
designated for use at such a juncture. Even Zakhar managed to get one of
his boots on, and, thus shod, to fuss around his master in company with
the doctor, the mistress of the house, and Anisia.

At length, blood having been let, Oblomov returned to consciousness, and
was informed that he had just sustained an apoplectic stroke, and that
he must adopt a different course of life. Henceforth, _vodka_, beer,
wine, coffee, and rich food were, with certain exceptions, to be
prohibited, while in their place there were prescribed for him daily
exercise and a regular amount of sleep of an exclusively nocturnal
nature. Even then these remedies would have come to nothing but for
Agafia Matvievna's watchfulness; but she had the wit so to introduce the
system that the entire household involuntarily assisted in its working.
Thus, partly by, cunning and partly by kindness, she contrived to wean
Oblomov from his attractive indulgences in wind, postprandial slumber,
and fish pasties. For instance, as soon as ever he began to doze, either
a chair would be unset in an adjoining room, or, of its own volition,
some old and worthless crockery would begin flying into splinters, or
the children would start making a noise, and be told, _fortissimo_, to
be gone. Lastly, should even this not prove effective, her own kindly
voice would be heard calling to him, in order to ask him some question
or another.

Also, the garden path was lengthened, and on it Oblomov accomplished,
morning and evening, a constitutional of some two hours' duration. With
him there would walk the landlady--or, if she could not attend, one of
the children, or his old friend, the irresponsible and to every man both
humble and agreeable Alexiev. One morning Oblomov, leaning on the boy
Vania's arm, slowly paced the path. By this time Vania had grown into
almost a youth, and found it hard to restrict his brisk, rapid step to
Oblomov's more tardy gait. As the elder man walked he made little use of
one of his legs, which was a trace of the stroke which he had recently
sustained.

"Let us go indoors now, Vaniushka," he said; wherefore they directed
their steps towards the door. But to meet them! there issued Agafia
Matvievna.

"Why are you coming in so early?" she inquired.

"Early, indeed? Why, we have paced the path twenty times each way, and
from here to the fence is a distance of fifty _sazhens_; wherefore we
have covered two versts in all."

"And how many times do _you_ say you have paced it?" she inquired of
Vania.

He hesitated.

"Do not lie, but look me straight in the face," she continued, fixing
him with her gaze. "I have been watching you the whole time. Remember
next Sunday. Possibly I might not let you go to the party that night."

"Well, mother," the boy said at length, "we have paced the path only
_twelve_ times."

"Ah, you rogue!" exclaimed Oblomov. "You were nipping off acacia-leaves
all the time, whereas _I_ was keeping the most careful account."

"Then you must go and do some more walking," decided the landlady.
"Besides, the fish soup is not yet ready." And she closed the door upon
the pair.

Oblomov, much against his will, completed another eight pacings of the
path, and then entered the dining-room. On the large round table
the fish soup was now steaming, and all hastened to take their usual
seats--Oblomov in solitary state on the sofa, the landlady on his right,
and the rest in due sequence.

"I will help you to _this_ herring, as it is the fattest," said Agafia
Matvievna.

"Very well," he remarked. "Only, I think that a pie would go well with
it."

"Oh dear! I have forgotten the pies! I meant to make some last night,
but my memory is all gone to pieces!" The artful Agafia Matvievna!
"Besides, I am afraid that I have forgotten the cutlets and the cabbage.
In fact, you must not expect very much of a dinner to-day." This was
addressed ostensibly to Alexiev.

"Never mind," he replied. "I can eat anything."

"But why not cook him some pork and peas, or a beef-steak?" asked
Oblomov.

"I _did_ go to the butcher's for a beefsteak, but there was not a single
morsel of good beef left. However, I have made Monsieur Alexiev a cherry
_compote_ instead. I know he likes that." The truth was that cherry
_compote was not_ bad for Oblomov; wherefore the complacent Alexiev had
no choice but both to eat it and to like it.

After dinner no power on earth could prevent Oblomov from assuming a
recumbent position; so, to obviate his going to sleep, the landlady
was accustomed to place beside him his coffee, and then to inspire,
her children to play games on the floor, so that, willy-nilly, Oblomov
should be forced to join in their sport. Presently she withdrew to
the kitchen to see if the coffee was yet ready, and, meanwhile, the
children's clatter died away. Almost at once a gentle snore arose in
the room--then a louder one--then one louder still; and when Agafia
Matvievna returned with the steaming coffee-pot she encountered such a
volume of snoring as would have done credit to a post-house.

Angrily she shook her head at Alexiev.

"It is not my fault," he said deprecatingly. "I tried to stir up the
children, but they would not listen to me."

Swiftly depositing the coffee-pot upon the table, she caught up little
Andriusha from the floor, and gently seated him upon the sofa by
Oblomov's side; whereupon the child wriggled towards him, climbed his
form until he had reached his face, and grasped him firmly by the nose.

"Hi! Hullo! Who is that?" cried Oblomov uneasily as he opened his eyes.

"You had gone to sleep, so Andriusha climbed on to the sofa and awoke
you," replied the landlady kindly.

"I had gone to sleep, indeed?" retorted Oblomov, laying his arm around
the little one. "Do you think I did not hear him creeping along on all
fours? Why, I hear _everything_. To think of the little rascal catching
me by the nose! I'll give it him! But there, there." Tenderly embracing
the child, he deposited him on the floor again, and heaved a profound
sigh. "Tell us the news, Ivan Alexiev," he said.

"You have heard it all. I have nothing more to tell."

"How so? You go into society, and I do not. Is there nothing new in the
political world?"

"It is being said that the earth is growing colder every day, and that
one day it will become frozen altogether."

"Away with you! Is _that_ politics?"

A silence ensued. Oblomov quietly relapsed into a state of coma that was
neither sleeping nor waking. He merely let his thoughts wander at will,
without concentrating them upon anything in particular as calmly he
listened to the beating of his heart and occasionally blinked his eyes.
Thus he sank into a vague, enigmatical condition which partook largely
of the nature of hallucination. In rare instances there come to a man
fleeting moments of abstraction when he seems to be reliving past stages
of his life. Whether he has previously beheld in sleep the phenomena
which are passing before his vision, or whether he has gone through a
previous existence and has since forgotten it, we cannot say; but at
all events he can see the same persons around him as were present in the
first instance, and hear the same words as were uttered then.

So was it with Oblomov now. Gradually there spread itself about him
the hush which he had known long ago. He could hear the beating of the
well-known pendulum, the snapping of the thread as it was bitten off,
and the repetition of familiar whispered sentences like "I cannot
make the thread go through the eye of the needle. Pray do it for me,
Masha--your eyesight is keener than mine."

Lazily, mechanically he looked into his landlady's face; and straightway
from the recesses of his memory there arose a picture which, somewhere,
had been well known to him.

To his vision there dawned the great, dark drawing-room in the house
of his youth, lit by a single candle. At the table his mother and her
guests were sitting over their needlework, while his father was silently
pacing up and down. Somehow the present and the past had become fused
and interchanged, so that, as the little Oblomov, he was dreaming that
at length he had reached the enchanted country where the rivers run milk
and honey, and bread can be obtained without toil, and every one walks
clad in gold and silver.

Once again he could hear the old legends and the old folk-tales, mingled
with the clatter of knives and crockery in the kitchen. Once again he
was pressing close to his nurse to listen to her tremulous, old woman's
voice. "That is Militrissa Kirbitievna," she was saying as she pointed
to the figure of his landlady. Also, the same clouds seemed to be
floating in the blue zenith that used to float there of yore, and the
same wind to be blowing in at the window, and ruffling his hair, and
the same cock of the Oblomovkan poultry-yard to be strutting and crowing
below. Suddenly a dog barked. Some other guest must be arriving! Would
it be old Schtoltz and his little boy from Verklevo? Yes, probably, for
to-day is a holiday. And in very truth it _is_ they--he can hear their
footsteps approaching nearer and nearer! The door opens, and "Andrei!"
 he exclaims excitedly, for there, sure enough, stands his friend--but
now grown to manhood, and no longer a little boy!...