For many a day after his illness Oblomov's mood was one of dull and
painful despondency; but gradually this became replaced with a phase of
mute indifference, in which he would spend hours in watching the snow
fall and listening to the grinding of the landlady's coffee-mill, to
the barking of the housedogs as they rattled at their chains, to the
creaking of Zakhar's boots, and to the measured tick of the clock's
pendulum. As of old, Agafia Matvievna, his landlady, would come and
propose one or another dish for his delectation; also her children would
come running to and fro through his rooms. To the landlady he returned
kindly, indifferent answers, and to the youngsters he gave lessons
in reading and waiting, while smiling wearily, involuntarily at their
playfulness. Little by little he regained his former mode of life.

One day Schtoltz walked into his room.

"Well, Ilya?" he said, with a questioning sternness which caused Oblomov
to lower his eyes and remain silent.

"Then it is to be 'never'?" went on his friend.

"'Never'?" queried Oblomov.

"Yes. Do you not remember my saying to you, 'Now or never'?"

"I do," the other returned. "But I am not the man I then was. I have now
set my affairs in order, and my plans for improving my estate are nearly
finished, and I write regularly for two journals, and I have read all
the books which you left behind you."

"But why have you never come to join me abroad?" asked Schtoltz.

"Something prevented me."

"Olga?"

Oblomov gathered animation at the question.

"Where is she?" he exclaimed. "I heard that she had gone abroad with her
aunt--that she went there soon after, after----"

"Soon after she had recognized her mistake," concluded Schtoltz.

"You know the story, then?" said Oblomov, scarcely able to conceal his
confusion.

"Yes, the whole of it--even to the point of the sprig of lilac. Do you
not feel ashamed of yourself, Ilya? Does it not hurt you? Are you not
consumed with regret and remorse?"

"Yes; please do not remind me of it," interrupted Oblomov hurriedly. "So
great was my agony when I perceived the gulf set between us that I fell
ill of a fever. Ah, Schtoltz, if you love me, do not torture me, do not
mention her name. Long ago I pointed out to her her mistake, but she
would not listen to me. Indeed I am not so much to blame."

"I am not blaming you," said Schtoltz gently; "for I have read your
letter. It is I that am most to blame--then she--then you least of all."

"How is she now?"

"How is she? She is in great distress. She weeps, and will not be
comforted."

Mingled anguish, sympathy, and alarm showed themselves on Oblomov's
features.

"What?" he cried, rising to his feet. "Come, Schtoltz! We must go to her
at once, in order that I may beg her pardon on my knees."

Schtoltz thought it well to change his tactics.

"Do you sit still," he said with a laugh. "I have not been telling you
the exact truth. As a matter of fact, she is well and happy, and bids me
give you her greeting. Also, she wanted to write to you, but I dissuaded
her on the ground that it would only cause you pain."

"Thank God for that!" cried Oblomov, almost with tears of joy. "Oh, I am
so glad, Schtoltz! Pray let me embrace you, and then let us drink to her
happiness!"

"But why are you hidden away in this corner?" asked Schtoltz after a
pause.

"Because it is quiet here--there is no one to disturb me."

"I suppose so," retorted Schtoltz. "In fact, you have here--well,
Oblomovka over again, only worse." He glanced about him. "And how are
you now?"

"I am not very well. My breathing is bad, and spots persist in floating
before my eyes. Sometimes, too, when I am asleep, some one seems to come
and strike me a blow upon the back and head, so that I leap up with a
start."

"Listen, Ilya," said Schtoltz gravely. "I tell you, in all seriousness,
that if you do not change your mode of life you will soon be seized with
dropsy or a stroke. As for your future, I have no hopes of it at all.
If Olga, that angel, could not bear you from your swamp on her wings,
neither shall I succeed in doing so. However, to the end I shall stand
by you: and when I say that, I am voicing not only my own wish, but also
that of Olga. For she desires you not to perish utterly, not to be
buried alive; she desires that at least I shall make an attempt to dig
you from the tomb."

"Then she has not forgotten me?" cried Oblomov with emotion--adding: "As
though I were worthy of her remembrance!"

"No, she has not forgotten you, and, I think, never will. Indeed, she is
not the sort of person to forget you. Some day you must go and pay her a
visit in the country."

"Yes, yes--but not now," urged Oblomov.

"Even at this moment I--I----" He pointed to his heart.

"What does it contain?" asked Schtoltz. "Love?"

"No, shame and sorrow. Ah, life, life!"

"What of it?"

"It disturbs me--it allows me no rest."

"Were it to do so, the flame of your candle would soon go out, and you
would find yourself in darkness. Ah, Ilya, Ilya! Life passes too swiftly
for it to be spent in slumber. Would, rather, it were a perpetual
fire!--that one could live for hundreds and hundreds of years! _Then_
what an immensity of work would one not do!"

"You and I are of different types," said Oblomov. "_You_ have wings; you
do not merely exist--you also fly. You have gifts and ambition; you do
not grow fat; specks do not dance before your eyes; and the back of your
neck does not need to be periodically scratched. In short, my organism
and yours are wholly dissimilar."

"Fie, fie! Man was created to order his own being, and even to change
his own nature; yet, instead, he goes and develops a paunch, and then
supposes that nature has laid upon him that burden. Once upon a time you
too had wings. Now you have laid them aside."

"Where are they?" asked Oblomov. "I am powerless, completely powerless."

"Rather, you are _determined_ to be powerless. Even during your boyhood
at Oblomovka, and amid the circle of your aunts and nurses and valets,
you had begun to waste your intellect, and to be unable to put on your
own socks, and so forth. Hence your present inability to live."

"All that may be so," said Oblomov with a sigh; "but now it is too late
to turn back."

"And what am I to say to Olga on my return?"

Oblomov hung his head in sad and silent meditation.

"Say nothing," at length he said. "Or say that you have not seen me...."

A year and a half later Oblomov was sitting in his dull, murky rooms. He
had now grown corpulent, and from his eyes _ennui_ peered forth like a
disease. At intervals, too, he would rise and pace the room, then lie
down again, then take a book from the table, read a few lines of it,
yawn, and begin drumming with his fingers upon the table's surface. As
for Zakhar, he was more seedy and untidy than ever. The elbows of his
coat were patched, and he had about him a pinched and hungry air, as
though his appetite were bad, his sleep poor, and his work three times
as much as it ought to have been. Oblomov's dressing-gown also was
patched: yet, carefully though the holes had been mended, the seams were
coming apart in various places. Likewise the coverlet of the bed was
ragged, while the curtains, though clean, were faded and hanging in
strips.

Suddenly the landlady entered to announce a visitor, and also to say
that it was neither Tarantiev nor Alexiev.

"Then it must be Schtoltz again!" thought Oblomov, with a sense of
horror. "What can he want with me? However, it does not matter."

"How are you?" inquired Schtoltz when he entered the room. "You have
grown stout, yet your face is pale."

"Yes, I am not well," agreed Oblomov. "Somehow my left leg has lost
all feeling." Schtoltz threw at him a keen glance, and then eyed the
dressing-gown, the curtains, and the coverlet.

"Never mind," said Oblomov confusedly. "You know that never at any time
do I keep my place tidy. But how is Olga?"

"She has not forgotten you. Possibly you will end by forgetting _her?_"

"No, never! Never could I forget the time when I was really alive and
living in Paradise. Where is she, then?"

"In the country."

"With her aunt?"

"Yes--and also with her husband."

"So she is married? Has she been married long? And is she happy?"
 Oblomov had quite sloughed his lethargy. "I feel as though you had
removed a great burden from my mind. True, when you were last here,
you assured me that she had forgiven me; but all this time I have been
unable to rest for the gnawing at my heart.... Tell me who the fortunate
man is?"

"Who he is?" repeated Schtoltz. "Why, cannot you guess, Ilya!"

Oblomov's gaze grew more intent, and for a moment or two his features
stiffened, and every vestige of colour left his cheeks.

"Surely it is not yourself?" he asked abruptly.

"It is. I married her last year."

The agitation faded from Oblomov's expression, and gave place to his
usual apathetic moodiness. For a moment or two he did not raise his
eyes; but when he did so they were full of kindly tears.

"Dear Schtoltz!" he cried, embracing his friend. "And dear Olga! May God
bless you both! How pleased I am! Pray tell her so."

"I will tell her that in all the world there exists not my friend
Oblomov's equal." Schtoltz was profoundly moved.

"No, tell her, rather, that I was fated to meet her, in order that I
might set her on the right road. Tell her also that I bless both that
meeting and the road which she has now taken. To think that that road
might have been different! As it is, I have nothing to blush for, and
nothing of which to repent. You have relieved my soul of a great burden,
and all within it is bright. I thank you, I thank you!"

"I _will_ tell her what you have said," replied Schtoltz. "She has
indeed reason for never forgetting you, for you would have been worthy
of her--yes, worthy of her, you who have a heart as deep as the sea. You
must come and visit us in the country."

"No," replied the other. "It is not that I am afraid of witnessing your
married happiness, or of becoming jealous of her love for you. Yet I
will not come."

"Then of what are you afraid?"

"Of growing envious of you. In your happiness I should see, as in a
mirror, my own bitter, broken life. Yet no life but this do I wish, or
have it in my power, to live. Do not, therefore, disturb it. Memories
are the height of poetry only when they are memories of happiness. When
they graze wounds over which scars have formed they become an aching
pain. Let us speak of something else. Let me thank you for all the care
and attention which you have devoted to my affairs. Yet never can I
properly requite you. Seek, rather, requital in your own heart, and
in your happiness with Olga Sergievna. Likewise, forgive me for having
failed to relieve you of your duties with regard to Oblomovka. It is my
fixed intention to go there before long."

"You will find great changes occurred in the place. Doubtless you have
read the statements of accounts which I have sent you?"

Oblomov remained silent.

"What? You have _not_ read them?" exclaimed Schtoltz, aghast. "Then
where are they?"

"I do not know. Wait a little, and I will look for them after dinner."

"Ah, Ilya, Ilya! Scarcely do I know whether to laugh or to weep."

"Never mind. We will attend to the affair after dinner. First let us
eat."

During the meal Oblomov bestowed high encomiums upon his landlady's
cooking.

"She looks after everything," he said. "Never will you see me either
with unmended socks or with a shirt turned inside out. She supervises
every detail."

He ate and drank with great gusto--so much so that Schtoltz contemplated
him with amazement.

"Drink, dear friend, drink," said Oblomov. "This is splendid _vodka_.
Even Olga could not make _vodka_ or patties or mushroom stews equal to
these. They are like what we used to have at Oblomovka. No man could be
better looked after by a woman than I am by my landlady, Agafia
Matvievna. Nevertheless I, I------" He hesitated.

"Well, what?" prompted Schtoltz.

"I owe her ten thousand roubles on note of hand."

"Ten thousand roubles? To your landlady? For board and lodging?" gasped
Schtoltz, horrified.

"Yes. You see, the sum has gone on accumulating, for I live generously,
and the debt includes accounts for peaches, pineapples, and so forth."

"Ilya," said Schtoltz, "_what_ is this woman to you?"

The other made no reply.

"She is robbing him," thought his friend. "She is wheedling his all out
of him. Such things are everyday, occurrences, yet I had not guessed
it."

Desirous of taking Oblomov away with him, he nevertheless found all his
efforts in that direction ineffectual.

"I ask you once again," he said. "In what relation do you stand to your
landlady?"

Again Oblomov reddened.

"Why are you desirous of knowing?" he countered.

"Because, on the score of our old friendship, I think it my duty to give
you a very serious warning indeed."

"A warning against what?"

"A warning against a pit into which you may fall, Now I must be going. I
will tell Olga that we may expect to see you this summer whether at our
place or at Oblomovka."

Then Schtoltz departed.

Not for some years did he visit the capital again, for Olga's health
necessitated a lengthy sojourn in the Crimea. For some reason or other
her recovery after the birth of a child had been slow.

"How happy I am!" was her frequent reflection. Yet, no sooner had she
passed her life in admiring review than she would find herself relapsing
into a meditative mood. What a curious person she was!--a person who,
in proportion as her felicity became more, complete, plunged ever deeper
and deeper into a brooding over the past! Delving into the recesses of
her own mind, she began to realize that this peaceful existence, this
halting at various stages of felicity, annoyed her. However, with
an effort of will she shook her soul clear of this despondency, and
quickened her steps through life in a feverish desire to seek noise and
movement and occupation. Yet the bustle of society brought her small
relief, and she would retire again into her corner--there to rid her
spirit of the unwonted sense of depression. Then she would go out once
more, and busy herself with petty household cares which confined her to
the nursery and the duties of a nurse and a mother, or join her husband
in reading and discussing serious books or poetry. Her main fear was
lest she should fall ill of the disease, the apathetic malady, of
Oblomovka. Yet, for all her efforts to slough these phases of torpor and
of spiritual coma, a dream of happiness other than the present used to
steal upon her, and wrap her in a haze of inertia, and cause her whole
being to halt, as for a rest from the exertions of life. Again, to
this mood there would succeed a phase of torture and weariness and
apprehension--a phase of dull sorrowfulness which kept asking itself
dim, indefinite questions and ceaselessly pondering upon them. And as
she listened to those questions she would examine herself, yet never
discover what it was she yearned for, nor why, at times, she seemed to
tire of her comfortable existence, to demand of it new and unfamiliar
impressions, and to be gazing ahead in search of something.

"What does it all mean?" she would say to herself with a shudder. "Is
there really anything more that I require, or that I need wish for?
Whither am I travelling? I have no farther to go--my journey is ended.
Yet have I _really_ completed my cycle of existence? Is this _really_
all--all?" Then she would glance timidly around her, and wonder, in
doubt and trembling, what such whispers of the soul might portend. With
anxious eyes she would scan the earth, the heavens, and the wilds, yet
find therein no answer, but merely gloom, profundity, and remoteness.
All nature seemed to be saying the same thing; in nature she could
perceive only a ceaseless, uniform current of life to which there was
neither a beginning nor an ending. Of course, she knew whom she could
consult concerning these tremors--she knew who could return the needed
answers to her questionings. But what would those answers import?
What if Schtoltz should say that her self-questionings represented the
murmurings of an unsympathetic, an unwomanly, heart--that his quondam
idol possessed but a _blasé_, dissatisfied soul from which nothing good
was to be looked for? Yes, how greatly she might fall in his estimation,
were he to discover these new and unwonted pangs of hers! Consequently,
whenever, in spite of her best efforts to conceal the fact, her eyes
lost their velvety softness, and acquired a dry and feverish glitter;
whenever, too, a heavy cloud overspread her face, and she could not
force herself to smile, and to talk, and to listen indifferently to the
latest news in the political world, or to descriptions of interesting
phenomena in some new walk of learning, or to remarks upon some new
creation of art--well, then she hid herself away, on the plea of
illness.

Yet she felt no desire to give way to tears; she experienced none of
those sudden alarms which had been hers during the period when her
girlish nerves had been excited even to the point of self-expression. So
if, while resting on some calm, beautiful evening, there came stealing
upon her, even amid her husband's talk and caresses, a feeling of
weariness and indifference to everything, she would merely ask herself
despairingly what it all meant. At one moment she would become, as
it were, turned to stone, and sit silent; at another she would make
feverish attempts to conceal her strange malady. Finally a headache
would supervene, and she would retire to rest. Yet all the while it was
a difficult matter for her to evade the keen eyes of her husband. This
she knew well, and therefore prepared herself for conversation with him
as nervously as she would have done for confession to a priest.