Zakhar, after closing the door successively behind Tarantiev and
Alexiev, stood expecting to receive a summons from his master, inasmuch
as he had overheard the fact that the latter had undertaken to write a
letter. But in Oblomov's study all remained silent as the tomb. Zakhar
peeped through the chink of the door, and perceived that his master was
lying prone on the sofa, with his head resting on the palm of his hand.
The valet entered the room.

"Why have you lain down again?" he asked.

"Do not disturb me: cannot you see that I am reading?" was Oblomov's
abrupt reply.

"Nay, but you ought to wash, and then to write that letter," urged
Zakhar, determined not to be shaken on.

"Yes, I suppose I ought. I will do so presently. Just now I am engaged
in thought."

As a matter of fact, he _did_ read a page of the book which was lying
open--a page which had turned yellow with a month's exposure. That done,
he laid it down and yawned.

"How it all wearies me!" he whispered, stretching, and then drawing
up, his legs. Glancing at the ceiling as once more he relapsed into a
voluptuous state of coma, he said to himself with momentary sternness:
"No--business first." Then he rolled over, and clasped his hands behind
his head.

As he lay there he thought of his plans for improving his property.
Swiftly he passed in review certain grave and fundamental schemes
affecting his plough-land and its taxation; after which he elaborated a
new and stricter course to be taken against laziness and vagrancy on the
part of the peasantry, and then passed to sundry ideas for ordering his
own life in the country.

First of all, he became engrossed in a design for a new house. Eagerly
he lingered over a probable disposition of the rooms, and fixed in
his mind the dimensions of the dining-room and the billiard-room, and
determined which way the windows of his study must face. Indeed, he even
gave a thought to the furniture and to the carpets. Next, he designed
a wing for the building, calculated the number of guests whom that
wing would accommodate, and set aside proper sites for the stables, the
coachhouses, and the servants' quarters. Finally he turned his attention
to the garden. The old lime and oak-trees should all be left as they
were, but the apple-trees and pear-trees should be done away with, and
succeeded by acacias. Also, he gave a moment's consideration to the idea
of a park, but, after calculating the cost of its upkeep, came to the
conclusion that such a luxury would prove too expensive--wherefore he
passed to the designing of orangeries and aviaries.

So vividly did these attractive visions of the future development of
his estate flit before his eyes that he came to fancy himself already
settled there, and engaged in witnessing the result of several years'
working of his schemes.

On a fair summer's evening he seemed to be sitting at a tea-table on the
terrace of Oblomovka--sitting under a canopy of leafy shade which the
sun was powerless to penetrate. From a long pipe in his hand he was
lazily inhaling smoke, and revelling both in the delightful view which
stretched beyond the circle of the trees and in the coolness and the
quiet of his surroundings. In the distance some fields were turning to
gold as the sun, setting behind a familiar birch-grove, tinged to red
the mirror-like surface of the lake. From the fields a mist had risen,
for the chill of evening was falling, and dusk approaching apace. To
his ears, at intervals, came the clatter of peasantry as they returned
homewards, and at the entrance gates the servants of the establishment
were sitting at ease, while from their vicinity came the sound of
echoing voices and laughter, the playing of _balalaiki_, * and the
chattering of girls as they pursued the sport of _goriclki_. ** Around
him, also, his little ones were frisking at times climbing on to his
knee and hanging about his neck; while behind the _samovar_ *** was
seated the real ruler of all that his eyes were beholding his divinity,
a woman, his _wife!_... And in the dining-room--a room at once elegant
and simply appointed--a cheerful fire was glowing, and Zakhar, now
promoted to the dignity of a major-domo, and adorned with whiskers
turned wholly grey, was laying a large, round table to a pleasant
accompanying tinkle of crystal and silver as he arranged, here a
decanter and there a fork.

     * Three-stringed, lute-like instruments.

     **  A sort of catch-as catch-can.

     ***  Tea-urn.

Presently the dreamer saw his wife and himself sit down to a bountiful
supper. Yes, and with them was Schtoltz, the comrade of his youth, his
unchanging friend, with other well-known faces. Lastly, he could see the
inmates of the house retiring to rest....

Oblomov's features blushed with delight at the vision. So clear, so
vivid, so poetical was it all that for a moment he lay with his face
buried in the sofa cushions. Suddenly there had come upon him a dim
longing for love and quiet happiness; suddenly he had become athirst for
the fields and the hills of his native place, for his home, for a wife,
for children....

After lying face downwards for a moment or two, he turned upon his back.
His features were alight with generous emotion, and for the time being
he was--_happy_.

Again the charming seductiveness of sleep-waking enfolded him in its
embrace. He pictured to himself a small colony of friends who should
come and settle in the villages and farms within a radius of fifteen
or twenty versts of his country house. Every day they should visit
one another's houses--whether to dine or to sup or to dance; until
everywhere around him he would be able to see only bright faces framed
in sunny days--faces which should be ever free of care and wrinkles,
and round, and merry, and ruddy, and double-chinned, and of unfailing
appetite. In all his neighbourhood there should be constant
summertide, constant gaiety, unfailing good fare, the joys of perennial
lassitude.... "My God, my God!" he cried in the fullness of his delight:
and with that he awoke. Once more to his ears came the cries of hawkers
in the courtyard as they vended coal, sand, and potatoes; once more he
could hear some one begging for subscriptions to build a church; once
more from a neighbouring building which was in course of erection there
streamed a babel of workmen's shouts, mingled with the clatter of tools.

"Ah!" he sighed with a sense of pain. "Such is real life! What ugliness
there is in the roar of the capital! When shall I attain the life of
paradise--the life for which I yearn? Shall I ever see my own fields, my
own forests? Would that at this moment I were lying on the grass under
a tree, and gazing upwards at the sun through the boughs, and trying to
count the birds which come and go over my head!"

But what about the plans for improving the estate? And what about the
_starosta_ and the flat? Once again these things knocked at his memory.

"Yes, yes," he answered them. "_Seichass_--presently."

With that he rose to a sitting posture on the sofa, lowered his legs to
the level of his slippers, and slipped the latter on to his feet; after
which he sat still for a little while. At length he attained a wholly
erect posture, and remained meditating for a couple of minutes.

"Zakhar! Zakhar!" he shouted as he eyed the table and the inkstand. "I
want you to, to----" Further he failed to get, but mutely pointed to the
inkstand, and then relapsed into thought.

The doorbell rang, and a little man with a bald head entered.

"Hullo, doctor!" Oblomov exclaimed as he extended one hand towards his
guest, and with the other one drew forward a chair. "What chance brings
you here?"

"The chance that, since all of you decline to be ill, and never send for
me, I am forced to come of myself," replied the doctor jestingly. "But
no," he added, in a more serious tone. "The truth is, I had to visit a
neighbour of yours on the upper floor, and thought I might as well take
you on the way. How are you?"

Oblomov shook his head despondently. "Poorly, doctor," he said. "I have
just been thinking of consulting you. My stomach will scarcely digest
anything, there is a pain in the pit of it, and my breath comes with
difficulty."

"Give me your wrist," said the doctor. He closed his eyes and felt the
patient's pulse. "And have you a cough?" he inquired.

"Yes--at night-time, but more especially while I am at supper."

"Hm! And does your heart throb at all, or your head ache?" He then
added other questions, bowed his bald pate, and subsided into profound
meditation. At length he straightened himself with a jerk, and said with
an air of decision--

"Two or three years more, of this room, of lying about, of eating rich,
heavy foods, and you will have a stroke."

Oblomov started.

"Then what ought I to do, doctor? Tell me, for Heaven's sake!"

"Merely what other people do--namely, go abroad."

"Pardon me, doctor, but how am I to do that?"

"Why should you not? Does money prevent you, or what?"

"Yes, yes; money is the reason," replied Oblomov, gladly catching at
the excuse, which was the most natural one that could possibly have been
devised. "See here--just read what my _slarosta_ writes."

"Quite so, but that is no business of mine," said the doctor. "_My_
business is to inform you that you must change your mode of life, and
also your place of residence. You must have fresh air--you must have
something to do. Go to Kissingen or to Ems, and remain there during June
and July, whilst you drink the waters. Then go on to Switzerland, or to
the Tyrol, and partake of the local grape cure. That you can do during
September and October."

"Oh the devil take the Tyrol!" murmured Oblomov under his breath.

"Next, transfer yourself to some dry place like Egypt, and put away from
you all cares and worries."

"Excellent!" said Oblomov. "I only wish that _starostas_' letters like
this one reached you!"

"Also you must do no thinking whatsoever."

"No thinking, you say?"

"Yes--you must impose upon the brain no exertion."

"But what about my plans for my estate? I am not a log, if you will
pardon my saying so."

"Oh, very well. I have merely been warning you. Likewise, you must
avoid emotion of every kind, for that sort of thing is sure to militate
against a successful cure. Try, rather, to divert yourself with riding,
with dancing, with moderate exercise in the open air, and with pleasant
conversation--more especially conversation with the opposite sex.
These things are designed to make your heart beat more lightly, and to
experience none but agreeable emotions. Again, you must lay aside all
reading and writing. Rent a villa which faces south and lies embowered
in flowers, and surround yourself also with an atmosphere of music and
women."

"And may I eat at all?"

"Yes, certainly; but avoid all animal and farinaceous food, as well as
anything which may be served cold. Eat only light soups and vegetables.
Even in _this_ great care will need to be exercised, for cholera, I may
tell you, is about. Walk eight hours out of every twenty-four; go in for
shooting."

"Good Lord!" groaned Oblomov.

"Finally," concluded the doctor, "go to Paris for the winter, where,
surrounded by a whirlpool of gaiety, you will best be able to distract
your mind from your habitual brooding. Cultivate, theatres, balls,
masquerades, the streets, society friends, noise, and laughter."

"Anything else?" inquired Oblomov, with ill-concealed impatience. The
doctor reflected a moment.

"Yes; also get the benefit of sea air," he said. "Cross over to England,
or else go for a voyage to America."

With chat he rose to take his leave. "Should you carry out these
instructions to the letter----" he began.

"Yes, yes. Of _course_ I shall carry them out!" said Oblomov bitterly as
he accompanied the physician to the door.

The doctor having departed, Oblomov threw himself back into an
arm-chair, clasped his hands behind his head, and remained sitting in
an almost unthinking heap. Roused by Zakhar to consider once more the
question of changing his quarters, he engaged in a long and heated
conversation with the valet. Eventually he dismissed the man to his den,
but could not dismiss from his own mind certain comparisons which Zakhar
had drawn between his master's life and the life of ordinary people.
How strange that suddenly there should have dawned in him thoughts
concerning human fate and destiny! All at once he found his mind drawing
a parallel between that destiny and his own existence; all at once
questions of life arose before his vision, like owls in an ancient ruin
flushed from sleep by a stray ray of sunlight. Somehow he felt pained
and grieved at his arrested development, at the check which had taken
place in his moral growth, at the weight which appeared to be pressing
upon his every faculty. Also gnawing at his heart there was a sense of
envy that others should be living a life so full and free, while all the
time the narrow, pitiful little pathway of his own existence was being
blocked by a great boulder. And in his hesitating soul there arose a
torturing consciousness that many sides of his nature had never yet been
stirred, that others had never even been touched, and that not one of
them had attained complete formation. Yet with this there went an aching
suspicion that, buried in his being, as in a tomb, there still remained
a moribund element of sweetness and light, and that it was an element
which, though hidden in his personality, as a nugget lies lurking in the
bowels of the earth, might once have become minted into sterling coin.
But the treasure was now overlaid with rubbish--was now thickly littered
over with dust. 'Twas as though some one had stolen from him, and
besmirched, the store of gifts with which life and the world had dowered
him; so that always he would be prevented from entering life's field
and sailing across it with the aid of intellect and of will. Yes, at the
very start a secret enemy had laid a heavy hand upon him and diverted
him from the road of human destiny. And now he seemed to be powerless to
leave the swamps and wilds in favour of that road. All around him was
a forest, and ever the recesses ox his soul were growing dimmer and
darker, and the path more and more tangled, while the consciousness
of his condition kept awaking within him less and less frequently--to
arouse only for a fleecing moment his slumbering faculties. Brain
and volition alike had become paralysed, and, to all appearances,
irrevocably--the events of his life had become whittled down to
microscopical proportions. Yet even with them he was powerless to
cope--he was powerless to pass from one of them to another. Consequently
they bandied him to and fro like the waves of the ocean. Never was he
able to oppose to any event elasticity of will; never was he able to
conceive, as the result of any event, a reasoned-out impulse. Yet
to confess this, even to himself, always cost him a bitter pang:
his fruitless regrets for lost opportunities, coupled with burning
reproaches of conscience, always pricked him like needles, and led him
to strive to put away such reproaches and to discover a scapegoat....

Once again Oblomov sank asleep; and as he slept he dreamed of a
different period, of different people, of a different place from the
present. Let us follow him thither.