One morning, in a flat in one of the great buildings in Gorokliovaia
Street, * the population of which was sufficient to constitute that of
a provincial town, there was lying in bed a gentleman named Ilya Ilyitch
Oblomov. He was a fellow of a little over thirty, of medium height, and
of pleasant exterior. Unfortunately, in his dark-grey eyes there was an
absence of any definite idea, and in his other features a total lack of
concentration. Suddenly a thought would wander across his face with
the freedom of a bird, flutter for a moment in his eyes, settle on his
half-opened lips, and remain momentarily lurking in the lines of his
forehead. Then it would disappear, and once more his face would glow
with a radiant _insouciance_ which extended even to his attitude and the
folds of his night-robe. At other times his glance would darken as with
weariness or _ennui_. Yet neither the one nor the other expression could
altogether banish from his countenance that gentleness which was the
ruling, the fundamental, characteristic, not only of his features, but
also of the spirit which lay beneath them. That spirit shone in
his eyes, in his smile, and in his every movement of hand and head. On
glancing casually at Oblomov a cold, a superficially observant person
would have said, "Evidently he is good-natured, but a simpleton;"
 whereas a person of greater penetration and sympathy than the first
would have prolonged his glance, and then gone on his way thoughtfully,
and with a smile as though he were pleased with something.

     *  One of the principal streets of Petrograd.

Oblomov's face was neither reddy nor dull nor pale, but of an indefinite
hue. At all events, that was the impression which it gave--possibly
because, through insufficiency of exercise, or through want of fresh
air, or through a lack of both, he was wrinkled beyond his years. In
general, to judge from the extreme whiteness of his bare neck, his
small, puffy hands, and his soft shoulders, one would conclude that
he possessed an effeminate body. Even when excited, his actions were
governed by an unvarying gentleness, added to a lassitude that was not
devoid of a certain peculiar grace. On the other hand, should depression
of spirits show itself in his face, His glance would grow dull, and
his brow furrowed, as doubt, despondency, and apprehension fell
to contending with one another. Yet this crisis of emotion seldom
crystallized into the form of a definite idea--still less into that of
a fixed resolve. Almost always such emotion evaporated in a sigh, and
shaded off into a sort of apathetic lethargy.

Oblomov's indoor costume corresponded exactly with the quiet outlines
of his face and the effeminacy of his form. The costume in question
consisted of a dressing-gown of some Persian material--a real Eastern
dressing-gown--a garment that was devoid both of tassels and velvet
facings and a waist, yet so roomy that Oblomov might have wrapped
himself in it once or twice over. Also, in accordance with the immutable
custom of Asia, its sleeves widened steadily from knuckles to shoulder.
True, it was a dressing-gown which had lost its pristine freshness, and
had, in places, exchanged its natural, original sheen for one acquired
by hard wear; yet still it retained both the clarity of its Oriental
colouring and the soundness of its texture. In Oblomov's eyes It was a
garment possessed of a myriad invaluable qualities, for it was so soft
and pliable that, when wearing it, the body was unaware of its presence,
and, like an obedient slave, it answered even to the slightest movement.
Neither waistcoat nor cravat did Oblomov wear when indoors, since he
loved freedom and space. For the same reason his slippers were long,
soft, and broad, to the end that, whenever he lowered his legs from the
bed to the floor without looking at what he was doing, his feet might
fit into the slippers at once.

With Oblomov, lying in bed was neither a necessity (as in the case of an
invalid or of a man who stands badly in need of sleep ) nor an accident
(as in the case of a man who is feeling worn out) nor a gratification
(as in the case of a man who is purely lazy). Rather, it represented his
normal condition. Whenever he was at home--and almost always he was at
home--he would spend his time in lying on his back. Likewise he used but
the one room--which was combined to serve both as bedroom, as study, and
as reception-room--in which we have just discovered him. True, two other
rooms lay at his disposal, but seldom did he look into them save on
mornings (which did not comprise by any means every morning) when his
old valet happened to be sweeping out the study. The furniture in them
stood perennially covered over, and never were the blinds drawn up.

At first sight the room in which Oblomov was lying was a well-fitted
one. In it there stood a writing-table of redwood, a couple of sofas,
upholstered in some silken material, and a handsome screen that was
embroidered with birds and fruits unknown to Nature.

Also the room contained silken curtains, a few mats, some pictures,
bronzes, and pieces of china, and a multitude of other pretty trifles.
Yet even the most cursory glance from the experienced eye of a man
of taste would have detected no more than a tendency to observe _les
convenances_ while escaping their actual observance. Without doubt that
was all that Oblomov had thought of when furnishing his study. Taste of
a really refined nature would never have remained satisfied with
such ponderous, ungainly redwood chairs, with such rickety whatnots.
Moreover, the back of one of the sofas had sagged, and, here and there,
the wood had come away from the glue. Much the same thing was to be seen
in the case of the pictures, the vases, and certain other trifles of
the apartment. Nevertheless, its master was accustomed to regard its
appurtenances with the cold, detached eye of one who would ask, "Who
has dared to bring this stuff here?" The same indifference on his part,
added to, perhaps, an even greater indifference on the part of his
servant, Zakhar, caused the study, when contemplated with attention, to
strike the beholder with an impression of all-prevailing carelessness
and neglect. On the walls and around the pictures there hung cobwebs
coated with dust; the mirrors, instead of reflecting, would more
usefully have served as tablets for recording memoranda; every mat was
freely spotted with stains; on the sofa there lay a forgotten towel, and
on the table (as on most mornings) a plate, a salt-cellar, a half-eaten
crust of bread, and some scattered crumbs--all of which had failed to
be cleared away after last night's supper. Indeed, were it not for the
plate, for a recently smoked pipe that was propped against the bed, and
for the recumbent form of Oblomov himself, one might have imagined that
the place contained not a single living soul, so dusty and discoloured
did everything look, and so lacking were any active traces of the
presence of a human being. True, on the whatnots there were two or three
open books, while a newspaper was tossing about, and the bureau bore
on its top an inkstand and a few pens; but the pages at which the books
were lying open were covered with dust and beginning to turn yellow
(thus proving that they had long been tossed aside), the date of the
newspaper belonged to the previous year, and from the inkstand, whenever
a pen happened to be dipped therein, there arose, with a frightened
buzz, only a derelict fly.

On this particular morning Oblomov had (contrary to his usual custom)
awakened at the early hour of eight. Somehow he looked perturbed;
anxiety, regret, and vexation kept chasing one another across his
features. Evidently he had fallen a prey to some inward struggle, and
had not yet been able to summon his wits to the rescue. The fact of the
matter was that, overnight, he had received from the _starosta_ * of
his country estate an exceedingly unpleasant letter. We all know what
disagreeable things a _starosta_ can say in his letters--how he can
tell of bad harvests, of arrears of debt, of diminished incomes, and so
forth; and though this particular official had been inditing precisely
similar epistles during the past three years, his latest communication
had affected its recipient as powerfully as though Oblomov had received
an unlooked-for blow. Yet, to do Oblomov justice, he had always bestowed
a certain care upon his affairs. Indeed, no sooner had he received the
_starosta's_ first disturbing letter (he had done so three years ago)
than he had set about devising a plan for changing and improving the
administration of his property. Yet to this day the plan in question
remained not fully thought out, although long ago he had recognized the
necessity of doing something actually decisive.

     *  Overseer or steward.

Consequently, on awakening, he resolved to rise, to perform his
ablutions, and his tea consumed, to consider matters, to jot down a few
notes, and, in general, to tackle the affair properly. Yet for
another halfhour he lay prone under the torture of this resolve; until
eventually he decided that such tackling could best be done after tea,
and that, as usual, he would drink that tea in bed--the more so since a
recumbent position could not prove a hindrance to thought.

Therefore he did as he had decided; and when the tea had been consumed
he raised himself upon his elbow and arrived within an ace of getting
out of bed. In fact, glancing at his slippers, he even began to extend a
foot in their direction, but presently withdrew it.

Half-past ten struck, and Oblomov gave himself a shake. "What is the
matter?" he said vexedly. "In all conscience 'tis time that I were
doing something! Would I could make up my mind to--to------" He broke
off with a shout of "Zakhar!" whereupon there entered an elderly man
in a grey suit and brass buttons--a man who sported beneath a perfectly
bald pate a pair of long, bushy, grizzled whiskers that would have
sufficed to fit out three ordinary men with beards. His clothes, it is
true, were cut according to a country pattern, but he cherished them as
a faint reminder of his former livery, as the one surviving token of the
dignity of the house of Oblomov. The house of Oblomov was one which
had once been wealthy and distinguished, but which, of late years, had
undergone impoverishment and diminution, until finally it had become
lost among a crowd of noble houses of more recent creation.

For a few moments Oblomov remained too plunged in thought to notice
Zakhar's presence; but at length the valet coughed.

"What do you want?" Oblomov inquired.

"You called me just now, _barin_?" *

     *  "Master" or "sir"

"I called you, you say? Well, I cannot remember why I did so. Return to
your room until I _have_ remembered."

Zakliar retired, and Oblomov spent another quarter of an hour in
thinking over the accursed letter.

"I have lain here long enough," at last he said to himself. "Really, I
_must_ rise.... But suppose I were to read the letter through carefully
and _then_ to rise? Zakhar!"

Zakhar re-entered, and Oblomov straightway sank into a reverie. For a
minute or two the valet stood eyeing his master with covert resentment.
Then he moved towards the door.

"Why are you going away?" Oblomov asked suddenly.

"Because, _barin_, you have nothing to say to me. Why should I stand
here for nothing?"

"What? Have your legs become so shrunken that you cannot stand for a
moment or two? I am worried about something, so you _must_ wait. You
have just been lying down in your room, haven't you? Please search for
the letter which arrived from the _starosta_ last night. What have you
done with it?"

"What letter? _I_ have seen no letter," asserted Zakhar.

"But you took it from the postman yourself?"

"Maybe I did, but how am I to know where you have since placed it?" The
valet fussed about among the papers and other things on the table.

"You never know anything," remarked his master. "Look in that basket
there. Or possibly the letter has fallen behind the sofa? By the way,
the back of that sofa has not yet been mended. Tell the joiner to
come at once. It was you that broke the thing, yet you never give it a
thought!"

"I did _not_ break it," retorted Zakhar. "It broke of itself. It
couldn't have lasted for ever. It was bound to crack some day." This
was a point which Oblomov did not care to contest. "Have you found the
letter yet?" he asked.

"Yes--several letters."

"But they are not what I want."

"I can see no others," asserted Zakhar.

"Very well," was Oblomov's impatient reply. "I will get up and search
for the letter myself."

Zakhar retired to his room again, but had scarcely rested his hands
against his pallet before stretching himself out, when once more there
came a peremptory shout of "Zakhar! Zakhar!"

"Good Lord!" grumbled the valet as a third time he made for the study.
"Why should I be tormented in this fashion? I would rather be dead!"

"My handkerchief!" cried Oblomov. "Yes, and very quickly, too! You
_might_ have guessed that that is what I am wanting."

Zakhar displayed no particular surprise or offence at this reproachful
command. Probably he thought both the command and the reproach natural.

"Who knows where the handkerchief is?" he muttered as he made a tour of
the room and felt each chair (although he could not but have perceived
that on them there was nothing whatsoever lying). "You lose everything,"
 he added, opening the door into the parlour in order to see whether the
handkerchief might not be lurking _there_.

"Where are you going?" exclaimed Oblomov. "'Tis _here_ you must
search. I have not been into those other rooms since the year before
last. Be quick, will you?"

"I see no handkerchief," said Zakhar, spreading out his hands and
peering into every corner. "_There_ it is!" suddenly he croaked.
"'Tis just underneath you. I can see its end sticking out. You have
been lying on it all the time, yet you actually ask me to find it!" He
hobbled away without waiting for an answer. For a moment or two Oblomov
was taken aback, but soon found another means of putting his valet in
the wrong.

"A nice way to do your cleaning!" he said. "What a lot of dust and dirt,
to be sure! Look at those corners! You never bestir yourself at all."

"If I never bestir myself," retorted Zakhar offendedly, "at least I do
my best, and don't spare myself, for I dust and sweep almost every day.
Everything looks clean and bright enough for a wedding."

"What a lie!" cried Oblomov. "Be off to your room again!"

That he had provoked Zakhar to engage in this conversation was a fact
which gave him small pleasure. The truth was he had forgotten that, once
a delicate subject is touched upon, one cannot well avoid a fuss. Though
he wished his rooms to be kept clean, he wished this task to be carried
out invisibly, and apart from himself; whereas, whenever Zakhar
was called upon to do even the least sweeping or dusting, he made a
grievance of it.

After Zakhar had retired to his den Oblomov relapsed into thought,
until, a few minutes later, the clock sounded a halfhour of some sort.

"What is that?" cried Oblomov in horror. "Soon the time will be eleven,
yet I am not yet up and washed! Zakhar! Zakhar!"

Zakhar reappeared.

"Are my washing things ready?" his master inquired.

"Yes, they have been ready a long time. Why do you not get up?"

"And why didn't _you_ tell _me_ that the things are ready? Had you done
that, I should have risen long ago. Go along, and I will follow you;
but at the moment I must sit down and write a letter."

Zakhar left the room. Presently he reappeared with a much-bescribbled,
greasy account-book and a bundle of papers.

"If you are going to write anything," he said, "perhaps you would like
to check these accounts at the same time? Some money is due to be paid
out."

"What accounts? What money?" inquired Oblomov petulantly.

"The accounts sent in by the butcher, the greengrocer, the laundress,
and the baker. All are wanting their money."

"Always money and worry!" grumbled Oblomov. "Why do you not give me the
accounts at intervals instead of in a batch like this?"

"Because each time you have sent me away, and then put matters off until
the morrow."

"Well, _these_ accounts can wait until the morrow."

"No, they cannot, for the creditors are pressing, and say they are going
to allow you nothing more on credit. To-day is the first of the month,
you must remember."

"Ah! Fresh cares, fresh worries!" cried Oblomov gloomily. "Why are you
standing there? Lay the table, and I will rise, wash, and look into the
whole business. Is the water yet ready?"

"Quite."

Oblomov raised himself and grunted as though he really intended to get
out of bed.

"By the way," said Zakhar, "whilst you were still asleep the manager
of the building sent the _dvornik_ * to say that soon you must quit the
flat, since he wants it for some one else."

     *  Porter or doorkeeper.

"Very well, then. We must go. Why worry me about it? This is the third
time you have done so."

"But they keep worrying _me_ about it."

"Then tell them that we intend to go."

Zakhar departed again, and Oblomov resumed his reverie. How long he
would have remained in this state of indecision it is impossible to say
had not a ring at the doorbell resounded through the hall.

"Some one has called, yet I am not yet up!" exclaimed Oblomov as he
slipped into his dressing-gown. "Who can it be?"

Lying down again, he gazed furiously towards the door.