The next moment there entered the room a tall, loosely built man who
evidently did not believe in refinement of costume, nor was in any way
ashamed of the fact. This was Mikhei Andreievitch Tarantiev, a native
of the same district as Oblomov. Though an individual of rough, sullen
mien, and of rather an overbearing manner, he did not lack a certain
keen ruggedness of wit; nor could any one be a better judge of mundane
questions in general, nor a better resolver of tangled juridical
problems (though usually he behaved rudely to the person who had sought
his advice on these matters). Nevertheless, his abilities stopped short
at a talent for verbal exposition; and no sooner was he called upon to
transmit a theory into action than his whole bearing underwent a change,
and in every case he discovered practical difficulties in the way of
what he conceived to be the best course to take.

"How are you?" he said brusquely as he extended a hairy hand. "What
do you mean by lying in bed like a log? Presently it will be twelve
o'clock, yet you are sprawling about on your back!" The other
forestalled him by hurriedly slipping his feet into his slippers, or the
new-comer would have pulled him out of bed.

"I was just about to rise," said Oblomov with a yawn.

"Yes; I know how you rise--how you go rolling about until lunch-time!
Zakhar, come and help your master to dress!"

Zakhar entered and glared at Tarantiev. Raising himself on his elbow,
Oblomov stepped from the bed like a man who is thoroughly worn out, and,
dropping into an arm-chair, sat there without moving, Meanwhile Zakhar
pomaded, parted, and combed his master's hair, and then asked him if he
desired to wash.

"Presently," said Oblomov. "Do you wait a little."

"Ah! So _you_ are here?" said Tarantiev suddenly as he turned to
Alexiev. "I had not seen you. By the way, what a swine is that kinsman
of yours!"

"_What_ kinsman?" inquired Alexiev with a stare. "I do not possess a
single relative."

"I mean Athanasiev. Surely he is a relative of yours? I _know_ he is."

"My name is Alexiev, not Athanasiev," said the other. "And I repeat that
I do not possess a single relative."

"But he is just like you an ugly man, as well as (like yourself, again)
a man of the name of Vassili Nikolaitch?"

"Nevertheless he is no kinsman of mine. Besides, my first names are Ivan
and Alexeitch."

"Well, he is exactly _like_ you, and a swine besides. You can tell him
that when next you meet him."

"I neither possess his acquaintance nor have ever set eyes upon him,"
 said Alexiev, opening his snuffbox.

"Give me a pinch," put in Tarantiev. "You use the plain stuff, and not
the French, do you? Why not use the French? Never have I seen a swine
like that relative of yours. On one occasion I borrowed of him fifty
roubles. That was two years ago. And fifty roubles are not a very
large sum, are they? They are a sum which he might well have forgotten,
mightn't he? Yes, he very well might. But as a matter of fact, he
remembered it. Not a month had passed before he took to saying, whenever
he met me: 'How about that debt?' I assure you I found him a perfect
nuisance! And only yesterday he walked into our office, and said to me:
'I expect you have just received your salary, and are therefore in a
position to repay me?' Well, I handed him over my salary, even though
he had come there for the express purpose of shaming me in public. I
had much ado not to put him out of the door. 'Poor fellow, you need the
money, I suppose?' As though I had _not_ needed it! Am I such a rich man
that I should quietly let him pouch fifty roubles? Oblomov, hand me a
cigar."

"The cigars are in that box there," said Oblomov, pointing to a whatnot.
He was still posed in his usual lazy but becoming attitude--he was still
taking no notice whatever of what was being done or said around him, but
contemplating his small white hands.

"What a rubbishy weed!" Tarantiev remarked, after sending out a puff of
tobacco smoke and inhaling another.

"You have come too early in the morning," suggested Oblomov with a yawn.

"Then I am boring you, am I?"

"No; I was merely making a remark. Usually you arrive at lunch-time, but
to-day you have come an hour beforehand."

"I have come an hour beforehand because I wish to find out what there
is likely to be to eat at dinner. As a rule you provide such rubbishy
stuff."

"You had better go into the kitchen and inquire."

Taramiev departed for the purpose,

"We are to have beef and veal," he remarked, on returning. "Ah, friend
Oblomov, though a landowner, you haven't the smallest notion how to
live. Your _ménage_ is the _ménage_ of a tradesman. Have you bought that
Madeira yet?"

"I don't know," replied Oblomov, scarcely noticing what had been said.
"You had better inquire of Zakhar. At all events there will be some sort
of wine."

"What? The rubbishy old stuff which you bought of a German dealer? You
ought to go to the English Store for your wines."

"Very well. Please send to the Store for some."

"Money first, please!"

Oblomov fumbled in a cashbox, and produced therefrom a ten-rouble, note.

"Madeira costs seven roubles the bottle," he said. "Here are ten
roubles. You will be given change at the Store."

Tarantiev hastened to cram the note into his pocket.

"Likewise, do you feel like hiring a conveyance and going to the
Ekaterinhov today?" he inquired. "If so, you might take me with you."

Oblomov shook his head.

"I have met with two misfortunes," he remarked. "In the first place, I
am to be turned out of this fiat."

"Because you haven't paid your rent, I suppose?"

"No, that is _not_ the reason. I always pay in advance. Tell me what had
better be done."

"Who made _me_ your adviser? Do you think I give advice for nothing? Ask
_him_, rather"--and Tarantiev pointed to Alexiev--"or else that kinsman
of his."

"No, no. Tell me what I ought to do."

"I should advise you to move to another flat."

"I could have said that myself."

"To the flat of a friend of mine in the Veaborg Quarter," continued
Tarantiev.

"What? To a flat in the Veaborg Quarter? In winter the whole district is
overrun with wolves!" *

     * The Veaborg Quarter is one of the most outlying suburbs of
     Petrograd.

"True, at times they come there from the Neva Islands, but my friend's
house has high walls to it, and, in addition, she and her family and a
bachelor brother are nice people, and not like that fellow over there."
 He pointed to Alexiev.

"But what has all this to do with me?" said Oblomov irritably. "I tell
you I am _not_ going to move there."

"You fool!" exclaimed Tarantiev. "In that house you would be much
quieter and more comfortable than you are here, and you would pay less,
and you would have larger quarters. Besides, it is a more respectable
place than this. Here one has to sit at a dirty table on which the
pepper-pot is empty, the vinegar bottle the same, the knives are not
clean, the tablecloth is falling to pieces, and dust, dust, dust, lies
everywhere. Give me my cab-fare, and I will go and secure you the flat
at once. Then you can move into it to-morrow." Tarantiev started to
leave the room.

"Stop, stop!" cried Oblomov. "I tell you I am _not_ going to the Veaborg
Quarter. Pray exercise your wits in contriving how I may remain where I
am. Moreover, I have a still more important affair on hand. That is to
say, I have just received from my _starosta_ a letter concerning which I
should be glad of your advice."

With that he searched for the document, found it after some difficulty,
and read it aloud.

"So you hear what the _starosta_ says as to drought and a failure of the
crops? What ought I to do?"

"The prime necessity," replied Tarantiev, "is complete quiet for you.
That you would get at the house of the friend of whom I have just
spoken; and I could come to see you every day."

"Yes, yes," said Oblomov. "But what about this affair of the
_starosta?_"

"The _starosta_ is lying. He is a thief and a rogue. Why, I know an
estate, only fifty versts from yours, where the harvest of last year was
so good that it cleared the owner completely of debt. That being so,
why have the crops on _your_ estate threatened to fail? Clearly the
_starosta_ is a robber. If I were there I'd teach him! Do you suppose
this letter to be a natural, an honest one? No, no more than we
can suppose that that sheep's head over there he pointed to Alexiev
again--"is capable of writing an honest letter, or his kinsman either."

"Whom am I to appoint in the _starosta's_ place?" asked Oblomov.
"Another man might prove even worse than he."

"You yourself had better go to the estate, and stay there for the
summer, and then move into my friend's house. _I_ will see that her
rooms shall be ready for you--yes, I will see to it at once. Personally,
I should have sold that property of yours, and bought another. Hand it
over to me, and I will very soon make the folk there aware that I am
alive!"

The upshot of it was that Oblomov accorded a half-hearted consent to
Tarantiev's procuring him a new lodging, and also to his writing to the
governor of the district where his (Oblomov's) property was situated.
After that Tarantiev departed, stating that he would return to dinner at
five o'clock.

With Tarantiev's departure a calm of ten minutes reigned in the
apartment. Oblomov was feeling greatly upset, both by the _starostas_
letter and by the prospect of the impending removal. Also, the
tumultuous Tarantiev had thoroughly tired him out.

"Why do you not sit down and write the letter?" asked Alexiev. "If you
wish I will clean the inkstand for you."

"Clean it, and the Lord bless you!" sighed Oblomov. "Let me write the
letter alone, and then you shall fair-copy it after dinner."

"Very well," replied Alexiev. "But now I must be off, or I shall be
delaying the Ekaterinhov party. Good-bye!"

Oblomov did not heed him, but, sinking back into a recumbent position in
the armchair, relapsed into a state of meditative lethargy.