On arriving at his rooms again, Oblomov never noticed that Zakhar
gave him a cold dinner, or that, after it, he rolled into bed and slept
heavily and insensibly; like a stone. Next day he received a letter in
which Olga said that she had spent the whole night weeping.

"She has been unable to sleep!" he thought to himself. "Poor angel! Why
does she care for me so much? And why am _I_ so fond of _her_? Would we
had never met! It is all Schtoltz's fault. He shed love over us as he
might have shed a disease. What sort of a life is this? Nothing but
anxiety and emotion! How can it ever lead to peaceful happiness and
rest?"

Sighing deeply, he threw himself upon the sofa--then rose again, and
went out into the street, as though seeking the normal existence
which pursues a daily, gradual course of contemplation of nature, and
constitutes a series of calm, scarcely perceptible phenomena of family
life. Of existence as a spacious, a turbulent, a billowing river,
as Schtoltz always conceived it to be, he could form no conception
whatever.

He wrote to Olga that he had taken a slight chill in the Summer
Gardens--wherefore he must stay at home for a couple of days; but that
he hoped soon to be better, and to see her on the following Sunday. In
reply she wrote that he must take the greatest care of himself; that
even on Sunday he must not come should he not be well enough; and that
a whole week's separation would be bearable to her if thereby he were
enabled to avoid risking his health. This excuse for omitting the Sunday
visit Oblomov gladly seized upon; wherefore he sent back word that, as a
matter of fact, a few days' additional convalescence _would_ be no more
than prudent.

Day succeeded day throughout the week. He read, he walked about the
streets, and, occasionally, he looked in upon his landlady for the
purpose of exchanging a couple of words and drinking some of her
excellent coffee. So comfortable did she make him that he even thought
of giving her a book to read; but when he did so she merely read the
headings of a chapter or two, and then returned him the volume, saying
that later she would get her little girl to read the work to her.

Meanwhile Olga received unexpected news. This was to the effect that a
lawsuit with regard to her property had ended in her favour, and that
within a month's time she would be able, should she wish, to enter into
actual possession. But of this, and of her other plans for the future,
she decided not to tell Oblomov, but to spend the present hour in dreams
of the happiness that was to be hers and his when she had seen love
complete its revolution in his apathetic soul, and the slothfulness fall
from his shoulders.

That very day he was to come. Yet three o'clock arrived--four
o'clock--and no Oblomov. By half-past five the beauty and the freshness
of her features had begun to fade. Insensibly her form assumed a
drooping posture, and as she sat at the table her face was pale. Yet no
one noticed this. The rest of the guests consumed the dishes which she
had prepared for him alone, and carried on a desultory, indifferent
chatter of conversation. Until ten o'clock she vacillated between hope
and despair. Then, on the arrival of that hour, she withdrew to her
room. At first she showered upon his head all the resentment that was
seething within her. Not a word of mordant sarcasm in her vocabulary
would she not have devoted to his punishing, had he been present. But
after a while her mind passed from fierceness to a thought which chilled
it like ice.

"He is sick," was that thought. "He is lonely and ill, and unable even
to write." So much did the idea gain upon her that she passed a sleepless
night, and rose pale, quiet, and determined. The same morning--it was
Monday--the landlady informed Oblomov that a visitor desired to see him.

"To see _me?_ Surely not?" he exclaimed. "Where is _she?_"

"Outside. Shall I send her away?" Oblomov was about to assent when
Olga's maid, Katia, entered the room. Oblomov changed countenance. "How
come you to be here?" he asked.

"My mistress is outside," she replied, "and has sent me in to bid you go
to her." There was no help for it, so he went out, and found Olga alone.

"Are you quite well?" she exclaimed. "What has been the matter with
you?" With that they entered his study.

"I am better now--the sore throat is almost gone," he replied; and as he
spoke he touched the part mentioned, and coughed slightly.

"Then why did you not come last night?" She raked him with a glance so
keen that for the moment he found himself tongue-tied.

"And why have _you_ taken such a step as this?" he countered. "Surely
you know what you are doing?"

"Never mind," she retorted impatiently. "I do not believe you have been
ill at all."

"No--I have not," he confessed.

"You have been deceiving me? Why so?"

"I will explain later. Important reasons have kept me away from you for
a fortnight."

"What are they?"

"I--I am afraid of scandal, of people's tongues."

"And not of the fact that possibly I might pass sleepless nights--that
possibly I might be so anxious as to be unable to rest?"

"You cannot think what is passing within me," he said, pointing to his
head, and then to his heart. "I am all on edge, all on fire."

With that he told her what Zakhar had said to him, and ended with a
statement that, like herself, he could not sleep, and that in every
glance he saw a question, or a sneer, or a veiled hint at the relations
which might be existing between her and himself.

"Let us decide to tell my aunt this week," she replied, "and at once
this chatter will cease. Had I not known you so well, I should scarcely
have been able to understand the fact that you can be afraid of
servants' gossip, yet not of making me anxious. Really I cannot
understand you."

"Listen," presently she went on. "There is more in this than meets the
eye. Tell me all that is in your mind. What does it mean?"

He looked at her--then kissed her hand and sighed.

"What have you been doing during the past week or so?" she persisted
as she glanced round the room. "What a wretched place you have got!
The windows are small, and the curtains dirty. Where are your _other_
rooms?"

He hastened to show her them, in the hope that he might divert her
mind from the question of his late doings; but she only repeated the
question.

"I have been reading," he replied, "and writing, and thinking of you."

"Have you yet read _my_ books?" she inquired. "Where are they? I will
take them back with me."

One of them happened to be lying on the table. She looked at the page at
which it was open, and saw that the page was covered with dust.

"You have not read them!" she exclaimed.

"No," he confessed.

Once more she looked at the mess and disorder in the room, and then
inquired: "Then what _have_ you been doing? You have neither been
writing nor reading."

"No; I have not had time to do so.. In this place, as soon as one rises,
the rooms need to be swept, and other interruptions occur afterwards.
Next, when dinner is over----"

"When dinner is over you need to go to sleep."

So positive in its assurance was her tone that after a moment's
hesitation he replied that her conjecture was correct.

"Why do you do that?"

"In order to pass the time. You are not here with me, Olga, and life is
wearisome and unbearable without you."

Her gaze became so stern that he broke off abruptly.

"Listen, Ilya," she said very gravely. "Do you remember saying in the
park that at length your life had been fired to flame, and that you
believed me to be the aim, the ideal, of your life?"

"How should I _not_ remember it, seeing that it has revolutionized my
whole existence? Cannot you _see_ how happy I am?"

"No, I do _not_ see it," she replied coldly. "Not only have you deceived
me, but also you are letting yourself relapse into your former ways."

"Deceived you? I swear to God that, were that so, I would leap into the
pit of Hell!"

"Yes--if the pit of Hell were just beneath your feet; but, were you to
put off doing so, even for a day or two, you would straightway change
your mind, and become nervous about the deed--more especially should
Zakhar and the rest begin gossiping on the subject! _That_ is not love."

"Ah, you have no idea how these cares and distractions have injured my
health!" he exclaimed. "Ever since I have known you, nothing but anxiety
has been my lot. Yet deprivation of you would cause me to die or to go
out of my mind. Only through you can I breathe or feel or see. Is it,
then, wonderful that, when you are not with me, I fall ill? Without you
everything is wearisome and distasteful. I feel like a machine, I walk
and act without knowing ever what I am doing. Yes, I am like a machine
whereof only you are the fuel, the motive power...."

When she had gone he trod the floor as on air. "How clearly she sees
life!" he reflected. "How unerringly from that book of wisdom is she
able to divine her road!" Yes, his life and hers had been bound to come
together like two rivers, for she, and only she, was his true guide and
instructor.

Next day there arrived a letter from the lawyer on his estate. He read
it through--then let it slip from his fingers to the ground. The gist of
the document was that his property was greatly involved, and that, if
he wished matters to be set in order, he must hasten to take up his
residence on the spot.

"Then marriage is not to be thought of for at least another year," he
reflected with dismay. "First of all I shall need to complete my
plans for the estate, and then to consult an architect, and then, and
then----"

He broke off with a sigh.