At Archie Schwert's party the fifteenth Marquess of Vanburgh, Earl
Vanburgh de Brendon, Baron Brendon, Lord of the Five Isles and
Hereditary Grand Falconer to the Kingdom of Connaught, said to the
eighth Earl of Balcairn, Viscount Erdinge, Baron Cairn of Balcairn, Red
Knight of Lancaster, Count of the Holy Roman Empire and Chenonceaux
Herald to the Duchy of Aquitaine, 'Hullo,' he said. 'Isn't this a
repulsive party? What are you going to say about it?' for they were both
of them, as it happened, gossip writers for the daily papers.

'I've just telephoned my story through,' said Lord Balcairn. 'And now
I'm going, thank God.'

'I can't think of what to say,' said Lord Vanburgh. 'My editress said
yesterday she was tired of seeing the same names over and over
again—and here they are again, all of them. There's Nina Blount's
engagement being broken off, but she's not got any publicity value to
speak of. Agatha Runcible's usually worth a couple of paragraphs, but
they're featuring her as a front-page news story to-morrow over this
Customs House business.'

'I made rather a good thing over Edward Throbbing being in a log shanty
in Canada which he built himself with the help of one Red Indian. I
thought that was fairly good because, you see, I could contrast that
with Miles being dressed as a Red Indian to-night, don't you think so,
or don't you?'

'I say, that's rather good, may I use it?'

'Well, you can have the shanty, but the Red Indian's mine.'

'Where is he actually?'

'Heaven knows, Government House at Ottawa, I think.'

'Who's that awful-looking woman? I'm sure she's famous in some way. It's
not Mrs Melrose Ape, is it? I heard she was coming.'

'Who?'

'That one. Making up to Nina.'

'Good lord, no. She's no one. Mrs Panrast she's called now.'

'She seems to know you.'

'Yes, I've known her all my life. As a matter of fact, she's my mother.'

'My dear, how too shaming. D'you mind if I put that in?'

'I'd sooner you didn't. The family can't bear her. She's been divorced
twice since then, you know.'

'My dear, of course not, I quite understand.'

Five minutes later he was busy at the telephone dictating his story.
'... Orchid stop, new paragraph. One of the most striking women in the
room was Mrs Panrast—P-A-N-R-A-S-T-, no, T for telephone, you
know—formerly Countess of Balcairn. She dresses with that severely
masculine chic, italics, which American women know so well how to
assume, stop. Her son, comma, the present Earl, comma, was with her,
stop. Lord Balcairn is one of the few young men about town....

'... the Hon. Miles Malpractice was dressed as a Red Indian. He is at
present living in the house of his brother, Lord Throbbing, at which
yesterday's party was held. His choice of costume was particularly—what
shall I say? hullo, yes—was particularly piquant, italics, since the
latest reports of Lord Throbbing say that he is living in a log shack in
Canada which he built with his own hands, aided by one Red Indian
servant, stop....'



You see, that was the kind of party Archie Schwert's party was.



Miss Mouse (in a very enterprising frock by Cheruit) sat on a chair with
her eyes popping out of her head. She never _could_ get used to so much
excitement, never. To-night she had brought a little friend with her—a
Miss Brown—because it was so much more fun if one had some one to talk
to. It was too thrilling to see all that dull money her father had
amassed, metamorphosed in this way into so much glitter and noise and so
many bored young faces. Archie Schwert, as he passed, champagne bottle
in hand, paused to say, 'How are you, Mary darling? Quite all right?'

'That's Archie Schwert,' said Miss Mouse to Miss Brown. 'Isn't he too
clever?'

'Is he?' said Miss Brown, who would have liked a drink, but didn't know
quite how to set about it. 'You _are_ lucky to know such amusing people,
Mary darling. I never see any one.'

'Wasn't the invitation clever? Johnnie Hoop wrote it.'

'Well, yes, I suppose it was. But you know, was it dreadful of me, I
hadn't heard of any of the names.'[A]

-----

[A] Perhaps it should be explained—there were at this time three sorts
of formal invitation card; there was the nice sensible copybook hand
sort with a name and _At Home_ and a date and time and address; then
there was the sort that came from Chelsea, _Noel and Audrey are having a
little whoopee on Saturday evening: do please come and bring a bottle
too, if you can_; and finally there was the sort that Johnnie Hoop used
to adapt from _Blast_ and Marinetti's _Futurist Manifesto_. These had
two columns of close print; in one was a list of all the things Johnnie
hated, and in the other all the things he thought he liked. Most of the
parties which Miss Mouse financed had invitations written by Johnnie
Hoop.

-----

'My dear, of course you have,' said Miss Mouse, feeling somewhere in her
depths—those unplumbed places in Miss Mouse's soul—a tiny, most
unaccustomed flicker of superiority; for she had gone through that
invitation word by word in papa's library some days ago and knew all
about it.

She almost wished in this new mood of exaltation that she had come to
the party in fancy dress. It was called a Savage party, that is to say
that Johnnie Hoop had written on the invitation that they were to come
dressed as savages. Numbers of them had done so; Johnnie himself in a
mask and black gloves represented the Maharanee of Pukkapore, somewhat
to the annoyance of the Maharajah, who happened to drop in. The real
aristocracy, the younger members of those two or three great brewing
families which rule London, had done nothing about it. They had come on
from a dance and stood in a little group by themselves, aloof, amused
but not amusing. Pit-a-pat went the heart of Miss Mouse. How she longed
to tear down her dazzling frock to her hips and dance like a Bacchante
before them all. One day she would surprise them all, thought Miss
Mouse.



There was a famous actor making jokes (but it was not so much what he
said as the way he said it that made the people laugh who did laugh).
'I've come to the party as a wild widower,' he said. They were that kind
of joke—but, of course, he made a droll face when he said it.

Miss Runcible had changed into Hawaiian costume and was the life and
soul of the evening.

She had heard some one say something about an Independent Labour Party,
and was furious that she had not been asked.

There were two men with a lot of explosive powder taking photographs in
another room. Their flashes and bangs had rather a disquieting effect on
the party, causing a feeling of tension, because every one looked
negligent and said what a bore the papers were, and how _too_ like
Archie to let the photographers come, but most of them as a matter of
fact wanted dreadfully to be photographed and the others were frozen
with unaffected terror that they might be taken unawares and then their
mamas would know where they had been when they said they were at the
Bicesters' dance, and then there would be a row again, which was so
_exhausting_, if nothing else.

There were Adam and Nina getting rather sentimental.

'D'you know,' she said, pulling out a lump, 'I'd quite made up my mind
that your hair was dark?' Archie Schwert, pausing with a bottle of
champagne, said, 'Don't be so sadistic, Nina.'

'Go away, hog's rump,' said Adam, in Cockney, adding, in softer tones,
'Are you disappointed?'

'Well, no, but it's rather disconcerting getting engaged to some one
with dark hair and finding it's fair.'

'Anyway, we aren't engaged any more, are we—or are we?'

'I'm not sure that we're not. How much money _have_ you, Adam?'

'Literally, none, my dear. Poor Agatha had to pay for dinner as it was,
and God knows what I'm going to do about Lottie Crump's bill.'

'Of course, you know—Adam, don't fall asleep—there's always papa. I
believe he's really much richer than he looks. He might give us some
money until your books start paying.'

'You know, if I wrote a book a month I should be free of that contract
in a year.... I hadn't thought of that before. I don't at all see why
I shouldn't do that, do you? ... or do you?'

'Of course not, darling. I'll tell you what. We'll go down and see papa
to-morrow, shall we?'

'Yes, that would be divine, darling.'

'Adam, don't go to sleep.'

'Sorry, darling, what I meant was that that would be divine.'

And he went to sleep for a little, with his head in her lap.

'Pretty as a picture,' said Archie, in Cockney, passing with a bottle of
champagne in his hand.

'Wake up, Adam,' said Nina, pulling out more hair. 'It's time to go.'

'That would be divine.... I say, have I been asleep?'

'Yes, for hours and hours. You looked rather sweet.'

'And you sat there.... I say, Nina, you are getting
sentimental.... Where are we going?'

There were about a dozen people left at the party; that hard kernel of
gaiety that never breaks. It was about three o'clock.

'Let's go to Lottie Crump's and have a drink,' said Adam.

So they all got into two taxicabs and drove across Berkeley Square to
Dover Street. But at Shepheard's the night porter said that Mrs Crump
had just gone to bed. He thought that Judge Skimp was still up with some
friends; would they like to join them? They went up to Judge Skimp's
suite, but there had been a disaster there with a chandelier that one of
his young ladies had tried to swing on. They were bathing her forehead
with champagne; two of them were asleep.

So Adam's party went out again, into the rain.

'Of course, there's always the Ritz,' said Archie. 'I believe the night
porter can usually get one a drink.' But he said it in the sort of voice
that made all the others say, no, the Ritz was too, too boring at that
time of night.

They went to Agatha Runcible's house, which was quite near, but she
found that she'd lost her latchkey, so that was no good. Soon some one
would say those fatal words, 'Well, I think it's time for me to go to
bed. Can I give any one a lift to Knightsbridge?' and the party would be
over.

But instead a little breathless voice said, 'Why don't you come to _my_
house?'

It was Miss Brown.

So they all got into taxicabs again and drove rather a long way to Miss
Brown's house. She turned on the lights in a sombre dining-room and gave
them glasses of whisky and soda. (She turned out to be rather a good
hostess, though over-zealous.) Then Miles said he wanted something to
eat, so they all went downstairs into a huge kitchen lined with every
shape of pot and pan and found some eggs and some bacon and Miss Brown
cooked them. Then they had some more whisky upstairs and Adam feel
asleep again. Presently Vanburgh said, 'D'you mind if I use the
telephone? I must just send the rest of my story to the paper.' Miss
Brown took him to a study that looked almost like an office, and he
dictated the rest of his column, and then he came back and had some more
whisky.

It was a lovely evening for Miss Brown. Flushed with successful
hospitality, she trotted from guest to guest, offering here a box of
matches, there a cigar, there a fruit from the enormous gilt dishes on
the sideboard. To think that all these brilliant people, whom she had
heard so much about, with what envy, from Miss Mouse, should be here in
papa's dining-room, calling her 'my dear' and 'darling'. And when at
last they said they really had to go, Miss Runcible said, 'Well, _I_
can't go, because I've lost my latchkey. D'you mind awfully if I sleep
here?'

Miss Brown, her heart in her mouth, but in the most natural way
possible, said, 'Of course not, Agatha darling, that would be divine.'

And then Miss Runcible said, 'How too divine of you, darling.'

_Rapture!_



At half-past nine the next morning the Brown family came down to
breakfast in the dining-room.

There were four quiet girls (of whom the Miss Brown who had given the
party was the youngest), their brother worked in a motor shop and had
had to get off early. They were seated at the table when their mama came
down.

'Now, children,' she said, 'do try to remember to talk to your father at
breakfast. He was quite hurt yesterday. He feels out of things. It's so
easy to bring him into the conversation if you take a little trouble,
and he does so enjoy hearing about everything.'

'Yes, Mama,' they said. 'We do try, you know.'

'And what was the Bicesters' dance like, Jane?' she said, pouring out
some coffee. 'Did you have a good time?'

'It was just too divine,' said the youngest Miss Brown.

'It was _what_, Jane?'

'I mean it was _lovely_, Mama.'

'So I should think. You girls are very lucky nowadays. There were not
nearly so many dances when I was your age. Perhaps two a week in the
season, you know, but _none_ before Christmas ever.'

'Mama.'

'Yes, Jane.'

'Mama. I asked a girl to stay the night.'

'Yes, dear. When? We're rather full up, you know.'

'Last night, Mama.'

'What an extraordinary thing to do. Did she accept?'

'Yes, she's here now.'

'_Well_.... Ambrose, will you tell Mrs Sparrow to put on another
egg?'

'I'm very sorry, my lady, Mrs Sparrow can't understand it, but there
_are_ no eggs this morning. She thinks there must have been burglars.'

'Nonsense, Ambrose, who ever heard of burglars coming into a house to
steal eggs?'

'The shells were all over the floor, my lady.'

'I see. That's all, thank you, Ambrose. Well, Jane, has your guest eaten
all our eggs too?'

'Well, I'm afraid she has... at least... I mean.'

At this moment Agatha Runcible came down to breakfast. She was not
looking her best really in the morning light.

'Good morning, all,' she said in Cockney. 'I've found the right room at
last. D'you know, I popped into a study or something. There was a sweet
old boy sitting at a desk. He _did_ look surprised to see me. Was it
your papa?'

'This is Mama,' said Jane.

'How are you?' said Miss Runcible. 'I say, I think it's quite too sweet
of you to let me come down to breakfast like this.' (It must be
remembered that she was still in Hawaiian costume.) 'Are you sure you're
not _furious_ with me? All this is really much more embarrassing for
_me_, isn't it, don't you think... or don't you?'

'Do you take tea or coffee?' at last Jane's mother managed to say.
'Jane, dear, give your friend some breakfast.' For in the course of a
long public life she had formed the opinion that a judicious offer of
food eased most social situations.

Then Jane's father came in.

'Martha, the most extraordinary thing! ... I think I must be losing my
reason. I was in my study just now going over that speech for this
afternoon, when suddenly the door opened and in came a sort of dancing
Hottentot woman half-naked. It just said, "Oh, how shy-making," and then
disappeared, and... oh...' For he had suddenly caught sight of
Miss Runcible '... oh... how do you do? ... How...'

'I don't think you have met my husband before.'

'Only for a second,' said Miss Runcible.

'I hope you slept well,' said Jane's father desperately.

'Martha never told me we had a guest. Forgive me if I appeared
inhospitable... I—er... Oh, why doesn't somebody else say
something.'

Miss Runcible, too, was feeling the strain. She picked up the morning
paper.

'Here's something terribly funny,' she said, by way of making
conversation. 'Shall I read it to you?'

'"_Midnight Orgies at No. 10._" My dear, isn't that divine? Listen,
"_What must be the most extraordinary party of the little season took
place in the small hours of this morning at No. 10, Downing Street. At
about 4 a.m. the policemen who are always posted outside the Prime
Minister's residence were surprised to witness_"—Isn't this too
amusing—"_the arrival of a fleet of taxis, from which emerged a gay
throng in exotic fancy dress_"—How I should have loved to have seen it.
Can't you imagine what they were like?—"_the hostess of what was
described by one of the guests as the brightest party the Bright Young
People have yet given, was no other than Miss Jane Brown, the youngest
of the Prime Minister's four lovely daughters. The Honourable Agatha
..._" Why, what an extraordinary thing.... Oh, my God!'

Suddenly light came flooding in on Miss Runcible's mind as once when, in
her débutante days, she had gone behind the scenes at a charity matinée,
and returning had stepped through the wrong door and found herself in a
blaze of flood-lights on the stage in the middle of the last act of
_Othello_. 'Oh, my God!' she said, looking round the Brown breakfast
table. 'Isn't that just too bad of Vanburgh. He's always doing that kind
of thing. It really would serve him right if we complained and he lost
his job, don't you think so, Sir James... or... don't you?'

Miss Runcible paused and met the eyes of the Brown family once more.

'Oh, dear,' she said, 'this really is all too bogus.'

Then she turned round and, trailing garlands of equatorial flowers, fled
out of the room and out of the house to the huge delight and profit of
the crowd of reporters and Press photographers who were already massed
round the historic front door.