Adam and Miss Runcible and Miles and Archie Schwert went up to the motor
races in Archie Schwert's car. It was a long and cold drive. Miss
Runcible wore trousers and Miles touched up his eyelashes in the
dining-room of the hotel where they stopped for luncheon. So they were
asked to leave. At the next hotel they made Miss Runcible stay outside,
and brought her cold lamb and pickles in the car. Archie thought it
would be nice to have champagne, and worried the wine waiter about dates
(a subject which had always been repugnant to him). They spent a long
time over luncheon because it was warm there, and they drank Kümmel over
the fire until Miss Runcible came in very angrily to fetch them out.

Then Archie said he was too sleepy to drive any more, so Adam changed
places with him and lost the way, and they travelled miles in the wrong
direction down a limitless bye-pass road.

And then it began to be dark and the rain got worse. They stopped for
dinner at another hotel, where every one giggled at Miss Runcible's
trousers in a dining-room hung with copper warming pans.

Presently they came to the town where the race was to be run. They drove
to the hotel where the dirt-track racer was staying. It was built in the
Gothic style of 1860, large, dark and called the Imperial.

They had wired him to book them rooms, but 'Bless you,' said the woman
at the counter marked 'Reception', 'all our rooms have been booked for
the last six months. I couldn't fit you in anywhere, not if you was the
Speed Kings themselves, I couldn't. I don't suppose you'll find anything
in the town to-night. You might try at the Station Hotel. That's your
only chance.'

At the Station Hotel they made Miss Runcible wait outside, but with no
better success.

'I might put one of you on the sofa in the bar parlour, there's only a
married couple in there at present and two little boys, or if you didn't
mind sitting up all night, there's always the palm lounge.' As for a
bed, that was out of the question. They might try at the 'Royal George',
but she doubted very much whether they'd _like_ that even if there was
room, which she was pretty sure there was not.

Then Miss Runcible thought that she remembered that there were some
friends of her father who lived quite near, so she found out their
telephone number and rang them up, but they said no, they were sorry,
but they had a completely full house and practically no servants, and
that as far as they knew they had never heard of Lord Chasm. So that was
no good.

Then they went to several more hotels, sinking through the various
graduations of Old Established Family and Commercial, plain Commercial,
High Class Board Residence pension terms, Working Girls' Hostel, plain
Pub. and Clean Beds: Gentlemen Only. All were full. At last, by the edge
of a canal, they came to the 'Royal George'. The landlady stood at the
door and rounded off an argument with an elderly little man in a bowler
hat.

'First 'e takes off 'is boots in the saloon bar,' she said, enlisting
the sympathy of her new audience, 'which is not the action of a
gentleman.'

'They was wet,' said the little man, 'wet as 'ell.'

'Well, and who wants your wet boots on the counter, I should like to
know. Then, if you please, he calls me a conspiring woman because I
tells him to stop and put them on before he goes 'ome.'

'Want to go 'ome,' said the little man. ''Ome to my wife and kids.
_Trying to keep a man from 'is wife._'

'No one wants to keep you from your wife, you old silly. All I says is
for Gawd's sake put on your boots before you go 'ome. What'll your wife
think of you coming 'ome without boots.'

'She won't mind 'ow I come 'ome. Why, bless you, I ain't been 'ome at
all for five years. It's 'ard to be separated from a wife and kids by a
conspiring woman trying to make yer put on yer boots.'

'My dear, she's quite right, you know,' said Miss Runcible. 'You'd far
better put on your boots.'

'There, 'ear what the lady says. Lady says you've to put on your boots.'

The little man took his boots from the landlady, looked at Miss Runcible
with a searching glance, and threw them into the canal. '_Lady_,' he
said with feeling. '_Trousers_,' and then he paddled off in his socks
into the darkness.

'There ain't no 'arm in 'im really,' said the landlady, 'only he do get
a bit wild when he's 'ad the drink. Wasting good boots like that....
I expect he'll spend the night in the lock-up.'

'Won't he get back to his wife, poor sweet?'

'Lor' bless you, no. She lives in London.'

At this stage Archie Schwert, whose humanitarian interests were narrower
than Miss Runcible's, lost interest in the discussion.

'The thing we want to know is, can you let us have beds for the night?'

The landlady looked at him suspiciously.

'Bed or beds?'

'Beds.'

'Might do.' She looked from the car to Miss Runcible's trousers and back
to the car again, weighing them against each other. 'Cost you a quid
each,' she said at last.

'Can you find room for us all?'

'Well,' she said, 'which of you's with the young lady?'

'I'm afraid I'm all alone,' said Miss Runcible. 'Isn't it too shaming?'

'Never you mind, dearie, luck'll turn one day. Well, now, how can we all
fit in? There's one room empty. I can sleep with our Sarah, and that
leaves a bed for the gentlemen—then if the young lady wouldn't mind
coming in with me and Sarah...'

'If you don't think it rude, I think I'd sooner have the empty bed,'
said Miss Runcible, rather faintly. 'You see,' she added, with tact, 'I
snore so terribly.'

'Bless you, so does our Sarah. _We_ don't mind... still, if you'd
_rather_...'

'Really, I think I should,' said Miss Runcible.

'Well then, I could put Mr Titchcock on the floor, couldn't I?'

'Yes,' said Miles, 'just you put Mr Titchcock on the floor.'

'And if the other gentleman don't mind going on the landing.... Well,
we'll manage somehow, see if we don't.'

So they all drank some gin together in the back parlour and they woke Mr
Titchcock up and made him help with the luggage and they gave him some
gin, too, and he said it was all the same to him whether he slept on the
floor or in bed, and he was very pleased to be of any service to any one
and didn't mind if he did have another drop just as a night-cap, as they
might say; and at last they all went to bed, very tired, but fairly
contented, and oh, how they were bitten by bugs all that night.

Adam had secured one of the bedrooms. He awoke early to find rain
beating on the window. He looked out and saw a grey sky, some kind of
factory and the canal from whose shallow waters rose little islands of
scrap-iron and bottles; a derelict perambulator lay partially submerged
under the opposite bank. In his room stood a chest of drawers full of
horrible fragments of stuff, a washhand stand with a highly coloured
basin, an empty jug and an old toothbrush. There was also a rotund
female bust covered in shiny red material, and chopped off short, as in
primitive martyrdoms, at neck, waist and elbows; a thing known as a
dressmaker's 'dummy' (there had been one of these in Adam's home which
they used to call 'Jemima'—one day he stabbed 'Jemima' with a chisel
and scattered stuffing over the nursery floor and was punished. A more
enlightened age would have seen a complex in this action and worried
accordingly. Anyway he was made to sweep up all the stuffing himself).

Adam was very thirsty, but there was a light green moss in the bottom of
the water bottle that repelled him. He got into bed again and found some
one's handkerchief (presumably Mr Titchcock's) under the pillow.

He woke again a little later to find Miss Runcible dressed in pyjamas
and a fur coat sitting on his bed.

'Darling,' she said, 'there's no looking-glass in my room and no bath
anywhere, and I trod on some one cold and soft asleep in the passage,
and I've been awake all night killing bugs with drops of face lotion,
and everything smells, and I feel so low I could die.'

'For heaven's sake let's go away,' said Adam.

So they woke Miles and Archie Schwert, and ten minutes later they all
stole out of the 'Royal George' carrying their suitcases.

'I wonder, do you think we ought to leave some money?' asked Adam, but
the others all said no.

'Well, perhaps we ought to pay for the gin,' said Miss Runcible.

So they left five shillings on the bar and drove away to the 'Imperial'.

It was still very early, but every one seemed to be awake, running in
and out of the lifts carrying crash-helmets and overalls. Miles' friend,
they were told, had been out before dawn, presumably at his garage. Adam
met some reporters whom he used to see about the _Excess_ office. They
told him that it was any one's race, and that the place to see the fun
was Headlong Corner, where there had been three deaths the year before,
and it was worse this year, because they'd been putting down wet tar. It
was nothing more or less than a death trap, the reporters said. Then
they went away to interview some more drivers. All teams were confident
of victory, they said.

Meanwhile Miss Runcible discovered an empty bathroom and came down
half-an-hour later all painted up and wearing a skirt and feeling quite
herself again and ready for anything. So they went in to breakfast.

The dining-room was very full indeed. There were Speed Kings of all
nationalities, unimposing men mostly with small moustaches and
apprehensive eyes; they were reading the forecasts in the morning papers
and eating what might (and in some cases did) prove to be their last
meal on earth. There were a great number of journalists making the best
of an 'out-of-town' job; there were a troop of nondescript 'fans',
knowledgeable young men with bright jumpers tucked inside their belted
trousers, old public-school ties, check tweeds, loose mouths and
scarcely discernible Cockney accents; there were R.A.C. officials and
A.A. officials, and the representatives of oil firms and tyre
manufacturers. There was one disconsolate family who had come to the
town for the christening of a niece. (No one had warned them that there
was a motor race on; their hotel bill _was_ a shock.)

'Very better-making,' said Miss Runcible with approval as she ate her
haddock.

Scraps of highly technical conversation rose on all sides of them.

'... Changed the whole engine over after they'd been scrutineered. Any
one else would have been disqualified...'

'... just cruising round at fifty...'

'... stung by a bee just as he was taking the corner, missed the tree
by inches and landed up in the Town Hall. There was a Riley coming up
behind, spun round twice, climbed the bank, turned right over and caught
fire...'

'... local overheating at the valve-heads. It's no sense putting a
supercharger in that engine at all...'

'Headlong Corner's jam. All you want to do is to brake right down to
forty or forty-five at the white cottage, then rev. up opposite the pub.
and get straight away in second on the near side of the road. A child
could do it. It's the double bend just after the railway bridge where
you'll get the funny stuff.'

'... kept flagging him down from the pits. I tell you that bunch don't
want him to win.'

'... She wouldn't tell me her name, but she said she'd meet me at the
same place to-night and gave me a sprig of white heather for the car. I
lost it, like a fool. She said she'd look out for it too...'

'... Only offers a twenty pound bonus this year...'

'... lapped at seventy-five...'

'... Burst his gasket and blew out his cylinder heads...'

'... Broke both arms and cracked his skull in two places...'

'... Tailwag...'

'... Speed-wobble...'

'... Merc...'

'... Mag...'

'... crash...'

When they finished breakfast Miss Runcible and Adam and Archie Schwert
and Miles went to the garage to look for their Speed King. They found
him hard at work listening to his engine. A corner of the garage had
been roped off and the floor strewn with sand as though for a boxing
match.

Outside this ring clustered a group of predatory little boys with
autograph albums and leaking fountain-pens, and inside, surrounded by
attendants, stood the essential parts of a motor car. The engine was
running and the whole machine shook with fruitless exertion. Clouds of
dark smoke came from it, and a shattering roar which reverberated from
concrete floor and corrugated iron roof into every corner of the
building so that speech and thought became insupportable and all the
senses were numbed. At frequent intervals this high and heart-breaking
note was varied by sharp detonations, and it was these apparently which
were causing anxiety, for at each report Miles' friend, who clearly
could not have been unduly sensitive to noise, gave a little wince and
looked significantly at his head mechanic.

Apart from the obvious imperfection of its sound, the car gave the
impression to an uninstructed observer of being singularly unfinished.
In fact, it was obviously still under construction. It had only three
wheels; the fourth being in the hands of a young man in overalls, who,
in the intervals of tossing back from his eyes a curtain of yellow hair,
was beating it with a hammer. It also had no seats, and another mechanic
was screwing down slabs of lead ballast in the place where one would
have expected to find them. It had no bonnet; that was in the hands of a
sign painter, who was drawing a black number 13 in a white circle. There
was a similar number on the back, and a mechanic was engaged in fixing
another number board over one of the headlights. There was a mechanic,
too, making a windscreen of wire gauze, and a mechanic lying flat doing
something to the back axle with a tin of grate polish and a rag. Two
more mechanics were helping Miles' friend to listen to the bangs. 'As if
we couldn't have heard them from Berkeley Square,' said Miss Runcible.

The truth is that motor cars offer a very happy illustration of the
metaphysical distinction between 'being' and 'becoming'. Some cars, mere
vehicles with no purpose above bare locomotion, mechanical drudges such
as Lady Metroland's Hispano Suiza, or Mrs Mouse's Rolls Royce, or Lady
Circumference's 1912 Daimler, or the 'general reader's' Austin Seven,
these have definite 'being' just as much as their occupants. They are
bought all screwed up and numbered and painted, and there they stay
through various declensions of ownership, brightened now and then with a
lick of paint or temporarily rejuvenated by the addition of some minor
organ, but still maintaining their essential identity to the scrap heap.

Not so the _real_ cars, that become masters of men; those vital
creations of metal who exist solely for their own propulsion through
space, for whom their drivers, clinging precariously at the steering
wheel, are as important as his stenographer to a stockbroker. These are
in perpetual flux; a vortex of combining and disintegrating units; like
the confluence of traffic at some spot where many roads meet, streams of
mechanism come together, mingle and separate again.

Miles' friend, even had it been possible in the uproar, seemed
indisposed to talk. He waved abstractedly and went on with his
listening. Presently he came across and shouted:

'Sorry I can't spare a moment, I'll see you in the pits. I've got you
some brassards.'

'My dear, what _can_ that be?'

He handed them each a strip of white linen, terminating in tape.

'For your arms,' he shouted. 'You can't get into the pits without them.'

'My dear, what bliss! Fancy their having pits.'

Then they tied on their brassards. Miss Runcible's said 'SPARE DRIVER';
Adam's, 'DEPOT STAFF'; Miles' 'SPARE MECHANIC' and Archie's, 'OWNER'S
REPRESENTATIVE.'

Up till now the little boys round the rope had been sceptical of the
importance of Miss Runcible and her friends, but as soon as they saw
these badges of rank they pressed forward with their autograph books.
Archie signed them all with the utmost complaisance, and even drew a
slightly unsuitable picture in one of them. Then they drove away in
Archie's car.

The race was not due to start until noon, but any indecision which they
may have felt about the employment of the next few hours was settled for
them by the local police, who were engaged in directing all traffic,
irrespective of its particular inclinations, on the road to the course.
No pains had been spared about this point of organization; several days
before, the Chief Constable had issued a little route map which was to
be memorized by all constables on point duty, and so well had they
learned their lesson that from early that morning until late in the
afternoon no vehicle approaching the town from any direction escaped
being drawn into that broad circuit marked by the arrows and dotted line
A-B which led to the temporary car park behind the Grand Stand. (Many
doctors, thus diverted, spent an enjoyable day without apparent
prejudice to their patients.)

The advance of the spectators had already assumed the form of a slow and
unbroken stream. Some came on foot from the railway station, carrying
sandwiches and camp stools; some on tandem bicycles; some in 'runabouts'
or motor cycle side-car combinations, but most were in modestly priced
motor cars. Their clothes and demeanour proclaimed them as belonging to
the middle rank; a few brought portable wireless sets with them and
other evidence of gaiety, but the general air of the procession was one
of sobriety and purpose. This was no Derby day holiday-making; they had
not snatched a day from the office to squander it among gipsies and
roundabouts and thimble-and-pea men. They were there for the race. As
they crawled along in bottom gear in a fog of exhaust gas, they
discussed the technicalities of motor car design and the possibilities
of bloodshed, and studied their maps of the course to pick out the most
dangerous corners.

The detour planned by the Chief Constable was a long one, lined with
bungalows and converted railway carriages. Banners floated over it
between the telegraph posts, mostly advertising the _Morning Despatch_,
which was organizing the race and paying for the victor's trophy—a
silver gilt figure of odious design, symbolizing Fame embracing Speed.
(This at the moment was under careful guard in the stewards' room, for
the year before it had been stolen on the eve of the race by the
official time-keeper, who pawned it for a ridiculously small sum in
Manchester, and was subsequently deprived of his position and sent to
gaol.) Other advertisements proclaimed the superiorities of various
sorts of petrol and sparking plugs, while some said '£100 =for Loss
of Limb. Insure To-day=.' There was also an elderly man walking
among the motor cars with a blue and white banner inscribed,
'=Without Shedding of Blood is no Remission of Sin=', while a
smartly dressed young man was doing a brisk trade in bogus tickets for
the Grand Stand.

Adam sat in the back of the car with Miles, who was clearly put out
about his friend's lack of cordiality. 'What I can't make out,' he said,
'is why we came to this beastly place at all. I suppose I ought to be
thinking of something to write for the _Excess_. I _know_ this is just
going to be the most dreary day we've ever spent.'

Adam felt inclined to agree. Suddenly he became aware that some one was
trying to attract his attention.

'There's an awful man shouting "Hi" at you,' said Miles. 'My dear, _your
friends_.'

Adam turned and saw not three yards away, separated from him by a young
woman riding a push-bicycle in khaki shorts, her companion, who bore a
knapsack on his shoulders, and a small boy selling programmes, the
long-sought figure of the drunk Major. He looked sober enough this
morning, dressed in a bowler hat and Burberry, and he was waving
frantically to Adam from the dicky of a coupé car.

'Hi!' cried the drunk Major. 'Hi! I've been looking for you everywhere.'

'I've been looking for you,' shouted Adam. 'I want some money.'

'Can't hear—what do you want?'

'Money.'

'It's no good—these infernal things make too much noise. What's your
name? Lottie had forgotten.'

'Adam Symes.'

'Can't hear.'

The line of traffic, creeping forward yard by yard, had at last reached
the point B on the Chief Constable's map, where the dotted lines
diverged. A policeman stood at the crossing directing the cars right and
left, some to the parking place behind the Grand Stand, others to the
mound above the pits. Archie turned on to the left. The drunk Major's
car accelerated and swept away to the right.

'_I must know your name_,' he cried. All the drivers seemed to choose
this moment to sound their horns; the woman cyclist at Adam's elbow rang
her bell; the male cyclist tooted a little horn like a Paris taxi, and
the programme boy yelled in his ear, 'Official programme—map of the
course—all the drivers.'

'Adam Symes,' he shouted desperately, but the Major threw up his hands
in despair and he disappeared in the crowd.

'_The way you pick people up..._' said Miles, startled into
admiration.

'The pits' turned out to be a line of booths, built of wood and
corrugated iron immediately opposite the Grand Stand. Many of the cars
had already arrived and stood at their 'pits', surrounded by a knot of
mechanics and spectators; they seemed to be already under repair. Busy
officials hurried up and down, making entries in their lists. Over their
heads a vast loud speaker was relaying the music of a military band.

The Grand Stand was still fairly empty, but the rest of the course was
already lined with people. It stretched up and down hill for a circle of
thirteen or fourteen miles, and those who were fortunate enough to own
cottages or public houses at the more dangerous corners had covered
their roofs with unstable wooden forms, and were selling tickets like
very expensive hot cakes. A grass-covered hill rose up sharply behind
the pits. On this had been erected a hoarding where a troop of Boy
Scouts were preparing to score the laps, passing the time contentedly
with ginger beer, toffee, and rough-and-tumble fights. Behind the
hoarding was a barbed wire fence, and behind that again a crowd of
spectators and several refreshment tents. A wooden bridge, advertising
the _Morning Despatch_, had been built on the road. At various points
officials might be seen attempting to understand each other over a field
telephone. Sometimes the band would stop and a voice would announce,
'Will Mr So-and-So kindly report at once to the time-keeper's office';
then the band would go on.

Miss Runcible and her party found their way to the pit numbered 13 and
sat on the matchboard counter smoking and signing autograph books. An
official bore down on them.

'No smoking in the pits, please.'

'My dear, I'm terribly sorry. I didn't know.'

There were six open churns behind Miss Runcible, four containing petrol
and two water. She threw her cigarette over her shoulder, and by a
beneficent attention of Providence which was quite rare in her career it
fell into the water. Had it fallen into the petrol it would probably
have been all up with Miss Runcible.

Presently No. 13 appeared. Miles' friend and his mechanic wearing
overalls, crash-helmets, and goggles, jumped out, opened the bonnet and
began to reconstruct it again.

'They didn't ought to have a No. 13 at all,' said the mechanic. 'It
isn't fair.'

Miss Runcible lit another cigarette.

'No smoking in the pits, _please_,' said the official.

'My dear, how _awful_ of me. I quite forgot.'

(This time it fell in the mechanic's luncheon basket and lay smouldering
quietly on a leg of chicken until it had burnt itself out.)

Miles' friend began filling up his petrol tank with the help of a very
large funnel.

'Listen,' he said. 'You're not allowed to hand me anything direct, but
if Edwards holds up his left hand as we come past the pits, that means
we shall be stopping next lap for petrol. So what you've got to do is to
fill up a couple of cans and put them on the shelf with the funnel for
Edwards to take. If Edwards holds up his right hand...' elaborate
instructions followed. 'You're in charge of the depôt,' he said to
Archie. 'D'you think you've got all the signals clear? The race may
depend on them, remember.'

'What does it mean if I wave the blue flag?'

'That you want me to stop.'

'Why should I want you to stop?'

'Well, you might see something wrong—leaking tank or anything like
that, or the officials might want the number plate cleaned.'

'I think perhaps I won't do anything much about the blue flag. It seems
rather too bogus for me.'

Miss Runcible lit another cigarette.

'Will you kindly leave the pits if you wish to smoke?' said the
official.

'What a damned rude man,' said Miss Runcible. 'Let's go up to that
divine tent and get a drink.'

They climbed the hill past the Boy Scouts, found a gate in the wire
fence, and eventually reached the refreshment tent. Here an atmosphere
of greater geniality prevailed. A profusion of men in plus-fours were
having 'quick ones' before the start. There was no nonsense about not
smoking. There was a middle-aged woman sitting on the grass with a
bottle of stout and a baby.

'Home from home,' said Miss Runcible.

Suddenly the military band stopped and a voice said, 'Five minutes to
twelve. All drivers and mechanics on the other side of the track,
please.'

There was a hush all over the course, and the refreshment tent began to
empty quickly.

'Darling, we shall miss the start.'

'Still, a drink _would_ be nice.'

So they went into the tent.

'Four whiskies, please,' said Archie Schwert.

'You'll miss the start,' said the barmaid.

'What a pig that man was,' said Miss Runcible. 'Even if we weren't
supposed to smoke, he might at least have asked us politely.'

'My dear, it was only you.'

'Well, I think that made it worse.'

'Lor', Miss,' said the barmaid. 'You surely ain't going to miss the
start?'

'It's the one thing I want to see more than anything... my dear, I
believe they're off already.'

The sudden roar of sixty high-power engines rose from below. 'They
_have_ started... how too shaming.' They went to the door of the
tent. Part of the road was visible over the heads of the spectators, and
they caught a glimpse of the cars running all jammed together like pigs
being driven through a gate; one by one they shook themselves free and
disappeared round the bend with a high shriek of acceleration.

'They'll be round again in quarter of an hour,' said Archie. 'Let's have
another drink.'

'Who was ahead?' asked the barmaid anxiously.

'I couldn't see for certain,' said Miss Runcible, 'but I'm fairly sure
it was No. 13.'

'_My!_'

The refreshment tent soon began to fill up again. The general opinion
seemed to be that it was going to be a close race between No. 13 and No.
28, a red Omega car, driven by Marino, the Italian 'ace'.

'Dirtiest driver I ever seen,' said one man with relish.

'Why, over at Belfast 'e was just tipping 'em all into the ditches, just
like winking.'

'There's one thing you _can_ be sure of. They won't _both_ finish.'

'It's sheer murder the way that Marino drives—a fair treat to see 'im.'

'He's a one all right—a real artist and no mistake about it.'

Adam and Miss Runcible and Archie and Miles went back to their pit.

'After all,' said Miss Runcible, 'the poor sweet may be wanting all
sorts of things and signalling away like mad, and no one there to pay
any attention to him—so discouraging.'

By this time the cars were fairly evenly spread out over the course.
They flashed by intermittently with dazzling speed and a shriek; one or
two drew into their pits and the drivers leapt out, trembling like
leaves, to tinker with the works. One had already come to grief—a large
German whose tyre had burst—punctured, some said, by a hireling of
Marino's. It had left the road and shot up a tree like a cat chased by a
dog. Two little American cars had failed to start; their team worked
desperately at them amid derisive comments from the crowd. Suddenly two
cars appeared coming down the straight, running abreast within two feet
of each other.

'It's No. 13,' cried Miss Runcible, really excited at last. 'And there's
that Italian devil just beside it. Come on, thirteen! Come on!' she
cried, dancing in the pit and waving a flag she found at hand. 'Come on.
Oh! Well done, thirteen.'

The cars were gone in a flash and succeeded by others.

'Agatha, darling, you shouldn't have waved the blue flag.'

'My dear, how awful. Why not?'

'Well, that means that he's to stop next lap.'

'Good God. Did I wave a blue flag?'

'My dear, you know you did.'

'_How_ shaming. What _am_ I to say to him?'

'Let's all go away before he comes back.'

'D'you know, I think we'd better. He might be furious, mightn't he?
Let's go to the tent and have another drink—don't you think, or don't
you?'

So No. 13 pit was again deserted.



'What did I say?' said the mechanic. 'The moment I heard we'd drawn this
blinkin' number I knew we was in for trouble.'



The first person they saw when they reached the refreshment tent was the
drunk Major.

'Your boy friend again,' said Miles.

'Well, there you are,' said the Major. 'D'you know I've been chasing you
all over London. What have you been doing with yourself all this time?'

'I've been staying at Lottie's.'

'Well, she said she'd never heard of you. You see, I don't mind
admitting I'd had a few too many that night, and to tell you the truth I
woke up with things all rather a blur. Well then I found a thousand
pounds in my pocket, and it all came back to me. There'd been a cove at
Lottie's who gave me a thousand pounds to put on Indian Runner. Well, as
far as I knew, Indian Runner was no good. I didn't want to lose your
money for you, but the devil of it was I didn't know you from Adam.' ('I
think that's a perfect joke,' said Miss Runcible.) 'And apparently
Lottie didn't either. You'd have thought it was easy enough to trace the
sort of chap who deals out thousands of pounds to total strangers, but I
couldn't find one fingerprint.'

'Do you mean,' said Adam, a sudden delirious hope rising in his heart,
'that you've still got my thousand?'

'Not so fast,' said the Major. 'I'm spinning this yarn. Well, on the day
of the race I didn't know what to do. One half of me said, keep the
thousand. The chap's bound to turn up some time, and it's his business
to do his own punting—the other half said, put it on the favourite for
him and give him a run for his money.'

'So you put it on the favourite?' Adam's heart felt like lead again.

'No, I didn't. In the end I said, well, the young chap must be
frightfully rich. If he likes to throwaway his money, it's none of my
business, so I planked it all on Indian Runner for you.'

'You mean...'

'I mean I've got the nice little packet of thirty-five thou. waiting
until you condescend to call for it.'

'Good heavens... look here, have a drink, won't you?'

'That's a thing I never refuse.'

'Archie, lend me some money until I get this fortune.'

'How much?'

'Enough to buy five bottles of champagne.'

'Yes, if you can get them.'

The barmaid had a case of champagne at the back of the tent. ('People
often feel queer through watching the cars go by so fast—ladies
especially,' she explained.) So they took a bottle each and sat on the
side of the hill and drank to Adam's prosperity.

'Hullo, everybody,' said the loud speaker. 'Car No. 28, the Italian
Omega, driven by Captain Marino, has just completed the course in twelve
minutes one second, lapping at an average speed of 78·3 miles per hour.
This is the fastest time yet recorded.'

A burst of applause greeted this announcement, but Adam said, 'I've
rather lost interest in this race.'

'Look here, old boy,' the Major said when they were well settled down,
'I'm rather in a hole. Makes me feel an awful ass, saying so, but the
truth is I got my note-case pinched in the crowd. Of course, I've got
plenty of small change to see me back to the hotel and they'll take a
cheque of mine there, naturally, but the fact is I was keen to make a
few bets with some chaps I hardly know. I wonder, old boy, could you
possibly lend me a fiver? I can give it to you at the same time as I
hand over the thirty-five thousand.'

'Why, of course,' said Adam. 'Archie, lend me a fiver, can you?'

'Awfully good of you,' said the Major, tucking the notes into his hip
pocket. 'Would it be all the same if you made it a tenner while we're
about it?'

'I'm sorry,' said Archie, with a touch of coldness. 'I've only just got
enough to get home with.'

'That's all right, old boy, _I_ understand. Not another word....
Well, here's to us all.'

'I was on the course at the November Handicap,' said Adam. 'I thought I
saw you.'

'It would have saved a lot of fuss if we'd met, wouldn't it? Still,
all's well that end's well.'

'What an _angelic_ man your Major is,' said Miss Runcible.

When they had finished their champagne, the Major—now indisputably
drunk—rose to go.

'Look here, old boy,' he said. 'I must be toddling along now. Got to see
some chaps. Thanks no end for the binge. So jolly having met you all
again. Bye-bye, little lady.'

'When shall we meet again?' said Adam.

'Any time, old boy. Tickled to death to see you any time you care to
drop in. Always a pew and a drink for old friends. So long everybody.'

'But couldn't I come and see you soon? About the money, you know.'

'Sooner the better, old boy. Though I don't know what you mean about
money.'

'My thirty-five thousand.'

'Why, yes, to be sure. Fancy my forgetting that. I tell you what. You
roll along to-night to the Imperial and I'll give it to you then. Jolly
glad to get it off my chest. Seven o'clock at the American bar—or a
little before.'

'Let's go back and look at the motor cars,' said Archie.

They went down the hill feeling buoyant and detached (as one should if
one drinks a great deal before luncheon). When they reached the pits
they decided they were hungry. It seemed too far to climb up to the
dining tent, so they ate as much of the mechanic's lunch as Miss
Runcible's cigarette had spared. Then a mishap happened to No. 13. It
drew into the side uncertainly, with the mechanic holding the steering
wheel. A spanner, he told them, thrown from Marino's car as they were
passing him under the railway bridge, had hit Miles' friend on the
shoulder. The mechanic helped him get out, and supported him to the Red
Cross tent. 'May as well scratch,' he said. 'He won't be good for
anything more this afternoon. It's asking for trouble having a No. 13.'
Miles went to help his friend, leaving Miss Runcible and Adam and Archie
staring rather stupidly at their motor car. Archie hiccoughed slightly
as he ate the mechanic's apple.

Soon an official appeared.

'What happened here?' he said.

'Driver's just been murdered,' said Archie. 'Spanner under the railway
bridge. Marino.'

'Well, are you going to scratch? Who's spare driver?'

'I don't know. Do you, Adam? I shouldn't be a bit surprised if they
hadn't murdered the spare driver, too.'

'I'm spare driver,' said Miss Runcible. 'It's on my arm.'

'She's spare driver. Look, it's on her arm.'

'Well, do you want to scratch?'

'Don't you scratch, Agatha.'

'No, I don't want to scratch.'

'All right. What's your name?'

'Agatha. I'm the spare driver. It's on my arm.'

'I can see it is—all right, start off as soon as you like.'

'Agatha,' repeated Miss Runcible firmly as she climbed into the car.
'It's on my arm.'

'I say, Agatha,' said Adam. 'Are you sure you're all right?'

'It's on my arm,' said Miss Runcible severely.

'I mean, are you quite certain it's absolutely safe?'

'Not _absolutely_ safe, Adam. Not if they throw spanners. But I'll go
quite slowly at first until I'm used to it. Just you see. Coming too?'

'I'll stay and wave the flag,' said Adam.

'That's right. Good-bye... goodness, how too stiff-scaring....'

The car shot out into the middle of the road, missed a collision by a
foot, swung round and disappeared with a roar up the road.

'I say, Archie, is it all right being tight in a car, if it's on a race
course? They won't run her in or anything?'

'No, no, that's all right. All tight on the race course.'

'Sure?'

'Sure.'

'All of them?'

'Absolutely every one—tight as houses.'

'That's all right then. Let's go and have a drink.'

So they went up the hill again, through the Boy Scouts, to the
refreshment tent.

It was not long before Miss Runcible was in the news.

'Hullo, everybody,' said the loud speaker. 'No 13, the English
Plunket-Bowse, driven by Miss Agatha, came into collision at Headlong
Corner with No. 28, the Italian Omega car, driven by Captain Marino. No
13 righted itself and continued on the course. No. 28 overturned and has
retired from the race.'

'Well done, Agatha,' said Archie.

A few minutes later:

'Hullo, everybody. No. 13, the English Plunket-Bowse, driven by Miss
Agatha, has just completed the course in nine minutes forty-one seconds.
This constitutes a record for the course.'

Patriotic cheers broke out on all sides, and Miss Runcible's health was
widely drunk in the refreshment tent.

A few minutes later:

'Hullo, everybody; I have to contradict the announcement recently made
that No. 13, the English Plunket-Bowse, driven by Miss Agatha, had
established a record for the course. The stewards have now reported that
No. 13 left the road just after the level crossing and cut across
country for five miles, rejoining the track at the Red Lion corner. The
lap has therefore been disallowed by the judges.'

A few minutes later:

'Hullo, everybody; No. 13, the English Plunket-Bowse car, driven by Miss
Agatha, has retired from the race. It disappeared from the course some
time ago, turning left instead of right at Church Corner, and was last
seen proceeding south on the bye-road, apparently out of control.'

'My dear, that's lucky for me,' said Miles. 'A really good story my
second day on the paper. This ought to do me good with the
_Excess_—_very_ rich-making,' and he hurried off to the post office
tent—which was one of the amenities of the course—to despatch a long
account of Miss Runcible's disaster.

Adam accompanied him and sent a wire to Nina: '_Drunk Major in
refreshment tent not bogus thirty-five thousand married to-morrow
everything perfect Agatha lost love Adam._'

'That seems quite clear,' he said.

They went to the hospital tent after this—another amenity of the
course—to see how Miles' friend was getting on. He seemed in some pain
and showed anxiety about his car.

'I think it's very heartless of him,' said Adam. 'He ought to be worried
about Agatha. It only shows...'

'Motor men _are_ heartless,' said Miles, with a sigh.

Presently Captain Marino was borne in on a stretcher. He turned on his
side with a deep groan and spat at Miles' friend as he went past him. He
also spat at the doctor who came to bandage him and bit one of the
V.A.D.'s.

They said Captain Marino was no gentleman in the hospital tent.

There was no chance of leaving the course before the end of the race,
Archie was told, and the race would not be over for at least two hours.
Round and round went the stream of cars. At intervals the Boy Scouts
posted a large red R against one or other of the numbers, as engine
trouble or collision or Headlong Corner took its toll. A long queue
stretched along the top of the hill from the door of the luncheon tent.
Then it began to rain.

There was nothing for it but to go back to the bar.

At dusk the last car completed its course. The silver gilt trophy was
presented to the winner. The loud speaker broadcast 'God Save the King',
and a cheerful 'Good-bye, everybody.' The tail of the queue outside the
dining tent were respectfully informed that no more luncheons could be
served. The barmaids in the refreshment tent said, 'All glasses, ladies
and gentlemen, please.' The motor ambulances began a final round of the
track to pick up survivors. Then Adam and Miles and Archie Schwert went
to look for their car.

Darkness fell during the drive back. It took an hour to reach the town.
Adam and Miles and Archie Schwert did not talk much. The effect of their
drinks had now entered on that secondary stage, vividly described in
temperance handbooks, when the momentary illusion of well-being and
exhilaration gives place to melancholy, indigestion and moral decay.
Adam tried to concentrate his thoughts upon his sudden wealth, but they
seemed unable to adhere to this high pinnacle, and as often as he
impelled them up, slithered back helplessly to his present physical
discomfort.

The sluggish procession in which they were moving led them eventually to
the centre of the town and the soberly illuminated front of the Imperial
Hotel. A torrential flow of wet and hungry motor enthusiasts swept and
eddied about the revolving doors.

'I shall die if I don't eat something soon,' said Miles. 'Let's leave
Agatha until we've had a meal.'

But the manager of the 'Imperial' was unimpressed by numbers or
necessity and manfully upheld the integrity of British hotel-keeping.
Tea, he explained, was served daily in the Palm Court, with orchestra on
Thursdays and Sundays, between the hours of four and six. A _table
d'hôte_ dinner was served in the dining-room from seven-thirty until
nine o'clock. An _à la carte_ dinner was also served in the grill room
at the same time. It was now twenty minutes past six. If the gentlemen
cared to return in an hour and ten minutes he would do his best to
accommodate them, but he could not promise to reserve a table. Things
were busy that day. There had been motor races in the neighbourhood, he
explained.

The commissionaire was more helpful, and told them that there was a
tea-shop restaurant called the Café Royal a little way down the High
Street, next to the Cinema. He seemed, however, to have given the same
advice to all comers, for the Café Royal was crowded and overflowing.
Every one was being thoroughly cross, but only the most sarcastic and
overbearing were given tables, and only the gross and outrageous were
given food. Adam and Miles and Archie Schwert then tried two more
tea-shops, one kept by 'ladies' and called 'The Honest Injun', a
workmen's dining-room and a fried-fish shop. Eventually they bought a
bag of mixed biscuits at a co-operative store, which they ate in the
Palm Court of the 'Imperial', maintaining a moody silence.

It was now after seven, and Adam remembered his appointment in the
American bar. There, too, inevitably, was a dense crowd. Some of the
'Speed Kings' themselves had appeared, pink from their baths, wearing
dinner-jackets and stiff white shirts, each in his circle of admirers.
Adam struggled to the bar.

'Have you seen a drunk Major in here anywhere?' he asked.

The barmaid sniffed. 'I should think not, indeed,' she said. 'And I
shouldn't serve him if he _did_ come in. I don't have people of that
description in _my_ bar. _The very idea._'

'Well, perhaps he's not drunk now. But have you seen a stout, red-faced
man, with a single eyeglass and a turned-up moustache?'

'Well, there _was_ some one like that not so long ago. Are you a friend
of his?'

'I want to see him badly.'

'Well, all I can say is I wish you'd try and look after him and don't
bring him in here again. Going on something awful he was. Broke two
glasses and got very quarrelsome with the other gentlemen. He had three
or four pound notes in his hand. Kept waving them about and saying,
"D'you know what? I met a mutt to-day. I owe him thirty-five thousand
pounds and he lent me a fiver." Well, that's not the way to talk before
strangers, is it? He went out ten minutes ago. I was glad to see the
back of him, I can tell you.'

'Did he say that—about having met a mutt?'

'Didn't stop saying it the whole time he was in here—most monotonous.'

But as Adam left the bar he saw the Major coming out of the gentlemen's
lavatory. He was walking very deliberately, and stared at Adam with a
glazed and vacant eye.

'Hi!' cried Adam. 'Hi!'

'Cheerio,' said the drunk Major distantly.

'I say,' said Adam. 'What about my thirty-five thousand pounds?'

The drunk Major stopped and adjusted his monocle.

'Thirty-five thousand and five pounds,' he said. 'What about them?'

'Well, where are they?'

'They're safe enough. National and Provincial Union Bank of England,
Limited. A perfectly sound and upright company. I'd trust them with more
than that if I had it. I'd trust them with a million, old boy, honest I
would. One of those fine old companies, you know. They don't make
companies like that now. I'd trust that bank with my wife and
kiddies.... You mustn't think I'd put your money into anything that
wasn't straight, old boy. You ought to know me well enough for
that....'

'No, of course not. It's terribly kind of you to have looked after
it—you said you'd give me a cheque this evening. Don't you remember?'

The drunk Major looked at him craftily. 'Ah,' he said. 'That's another
matter. I told _some one_ I'd give him a cheque. But how am I to know it
was you? ... I've got to be careful, you know. Suppose you were just a
crook dressed up. I don't say you are, mind, but supposing. Where'ld I
be then? You have to look at both sides of a case like this.'

'Oh, God.... I've got two friends here who'll swear to you I'm Adam
Symes. Will that do?'

'Might be a gang. Besides _I_ don't know that the name of the chap who
gave me the thousand _was_ Adam what-d'you-call-it at all. Only your
word for it. I'll tell you what,' said the Major, sitting down in a deep
armchair, 'I'll sleep on it. Just forty winks. I'll let you know my
decision when I wake up. Don't think me suspicious, old boy, but I've
got to be careful... other chap's money, you know...' And he fell
asleep.

Adam struggled through the crowd to the Palm Court, where he had left
Miles and Archie. News of No. 13 had just come through. The car had been
found piled up on the market cross of a large village about fifteen
miles away (doing irreparable damage to a monument already scheduled for
preservation by the Office of Works). But there was no sign of Miss
Runcible.

'I suppose we ought to do something about it,' said Miles. 'This is the
most miserable day I ever spent. Did you get your fortune?'

'The Major was too drunk to recognize me. He's just gone to sleep.'

'_Well._'

'We must go to this beastly village and look for Agatha.'

'I can't leave my Major. He'll probably wake up soon and give the
fortune to the first person he sees.'

'Let's just go and shake him until he gives us the fortune now,' said
Miles.

But this was impracticable, for when they reached the chair where Adam
had left him, the drunk Major was gone.

The hall porter remembered him going out quite clearly. He had pressed a
pound into his hand, saving, 'Met-a-mutt-to-day,' and taken a taxi to
the station.

'D'you know,' said Adam. 'I don't believe that I'm ever going to get
that fortune.'

'Well, I don't see that you've very much to complain of,' said Archie.
'You're no worse off than you were. _I've_ lost a fiver and five bottles
of champagne.'

'That's true,' said Adam, a little consoled.



They got into the car and drove through the rain to the village where
the Plunket-Bowse had been found. There it stood, still smoking and
partially recognizable, surrounded by admiring villagers. A constable in
a waterproof cape was doing his best to preserve it intact from the
raids of souvenir hunters who were collecting the smaller fragments.

No one seemed to have witnessed the disaster. The younger members of the
community were all at the races, while the elders were engaged in their
afternoon naps. One thought he had heard a crash.

Inquiries at the railway station, however, disclosed that a young lady,
much dishevelled in appearance, and wearing some kind of band on her
arm, had appeared in the booking office early that afternoon and asked
where she was. On being told, she said, well, she wished she wasn't,
because some one had left an enormous stone spanner in the middle of the
road. She admitted feeling rather odd. The station-master had asked her
if she would like to come in and sit down and offered to get her some
brandy. She said, 'No, no more brandy,' and bought a first-class ticket
to London. She had left on the 3.25 train.

'So that's all right,' said Archie.

Then they left the village and presently found an hotel on the Great
North Road, where they dined and spent the night. They reached London by
luncheon time next day, and learned that Miss Runcible had been found
early that morning staring fixedly at a model engine in the central hall
at Euston Station. In answer to some gentle questions, she replied that
to the best of her knowledge she had no name, pointing to the brassard
on her arm, as if in confirmation of this fact. She had come in a motor
car, she explained, which would not stop. It was full of bugs which she
had tried to kill with drops of face lotion. One of them threw a
spanner. There had been a stone thing in the way. They shouldn't put up
symbols like that in the middle of the road, should they, or should
they?

So they conveyed her to a nursing home in Wimpole Street and kept her
for some time in a darkened room.