Ten days later Adam bought some flowers at the corner of Wigmore Street
and went to call on Miss Runcible at her nursing home. He was shown
first into the matron's room. She had numerous photographs in silver
frames and a very nasty fox terrier. She smoked a cigarette in a greedy
way, making slight sucking noises.

'Just taking a moment off in my den,' she explained. 'Down, Spot, down.
But I can see you're fond of dogs,' she added, as Adam gave Spot a
half-hearted pat on the head. 'So you want to see Miss Runcible? Well, I
ought to warn you first that she must have no kind of excitement
whatever. She's had a severe shock. Are you a relation, may I ask?'

'No, only a friend.'

'A very _special_ friend, perhaps, eh?' said the Matron archly. 'Never
mind, I'll spare your blushes. Just you run up and see her. But not more
than five minutes, mind, or you'll have me on your tracks.'

There was a reek of ether on the stairs which reminded Adam of the times
when, waiting to take her to luncheon, he had sat on Nina's bed while
she did her face. (She invariably made him turn his back until it was
over, having a keen sense of modesty about this one part of her toilet,
in curious contrast to some girls, who would die rather than be seen in
their underclothes, and yet openly flaunt unpainted faces in front of
anyone.)

It hurt Adam deeply to think much about Nina.

Outside Miss Runcible's door hung a very interesting chart which showed
the fluctuations of her temperature and pulse and many other curious
details of her progress. He studied this with pleasure until a nurse,
carrying a tray of highly polished surgical instruments, gave him such a
look that he felt obliged to turn away.

Miss Runcible lay in a high, narrow bed in a darkened room.

A nurse was crocheting at her side when Adam entered. She rose, dropping
a few odds and ends from her lap, and said, 'There's someone come to see
you, dear. Now remember you aren't to talk much,' She took the flowers
from Adam's hand, said, 'Look, what lovelies. Aren't you a lucky girl?'
and left the room with them. She returned a moment later carrying them
in a jug of water. 'There, the thirsties,' she said. 'Don't they love to
get back to the nice cool water?'

Then she went out again.

'Darling,' said a faint voice from the bed, 'I can't really see who it
is. Would it be awful to draw the curtains?'

Adam crossed the room and let in the light of the grey December
afternoon.

'My dear, how blind-making. There are some cocktail things in the
wardrobe. Do make a big one. The nurses love them so. It's such a nice
nursing home this, Adam, only all the nurses are starved, and there's a
breath-taking young man next door who keeps putting his head in and
asking how I am. _He_ fell out of an _aeroplane_, which is rather grand,
don't you think?'

'How are you feeling, Agatha?'

'Well, rather odd, to tell you the truth.... How's Nina?'

'She's got engaged to be married—haven't you heard?'

'My dear, the nurses are interested in no one but Princess Elizabeth. Do
tell me.'

'A young man called Ginger.'

'_Well?_'

'Don't you remember him? He came on with us after the airship party.'

'Not the one who was sick?'

'No, the other.'

'I don't remember... does Nina call him Ginger?'

'Yes.'

'Why?'

'He asked her to.'

'_Well?_'

'She used to play with him when they were children. So she's going to
marry him.'

'My dear, isn't that rather sad-making for you?'

'I'm desperate about it. I'm thinking of committing suicide, like
Simon.'

'Don't do that, darling... did Simon commit suicide?'

'My dear, you know he did. The night all those libel actions started.'

'Oh, _that_ Simon. I thought you meant _Simon_.'

'Who's Simon?'

'The young man who fell out of the aeroplane. The nurses call him Simple
Simon because it's affected his brains... but, Adam I _am_ sorry
about Nina. I'll tell you what we'll do. As soon as I'm well again we'll
make Mary Mouse give a lovely party to cheer you up.'

'Haven't you heard about Mary?'

'No, what?'

'She went off to Monte Carlo with the Maharajah of Pukkapore.'

'_My dear_, aren't the Mice furious?'

'She's just receiving religious instruction before her official
reception as a royal concubine. Then they're going to India.'

'How people are _disappearing_, Adam. Did you get that money from the
drunk Major?'

'No, he disappeared too.'

'D'you know, all that time when I was dotty I had the most awful dreams.
I thought we were all driving round and round in a motor race and none
of us could stop, and there was an enormous audience composed entirely
of gossip writers and gate-crashers and Archie Schwert and people like
that, all shouting to us at once to go faster, and car after car kept
crashing until I was left all alone driving and driving—and then I used
to crash and wake up.'

Then the door opened, and Miles came popping in.

'Agatha, Adam, my dears. The _time_ I've had trying to get in. I can't
tell you how bogus they were downstairs. First I said I was Lord Chasm,
and that wasn't any good; and I said I was one of the doctors, and that
wasn't any good; and I said I was your young man, and _that_ wasn't any
good; and I said I was a gossip writer, and they let me up at once and
said I wasn't to excite you, but would I put a piece in my paper about
their nursing home. _How_ are you, Aggie darling? I brought up some new
records.'

'You are angelic. Do let's try them. There's a gramophone under the
bed.'

'There's a whole lot more people coming to see you to-day. I saw them
all at luncheon at Margot's. Johnny Hoop and Van and Archie Schwert. I
wonder if they'll all manage to get in.'

They got in.

So soon there was quite a party, and Simon appeared from next door in a
very gay dressing-gown, and they played the new records and Miss
Runcible moved her bandaged limbs under the bedclothes in negro rhythm.

Last of all, Nina came in looking quite lovely and very ill.

'Nina, I hear you're engaged.'

'Yes, it's very lucky. My papa has just put all his money into a cinema
film and lost it all.'

'My dear, it doesn't matter at all. My papa lost all his twice. It
doesn't make a bit of difference. That's just one of the things one has
to learn about losing all one's money.... Is it true that you really
call him Ginger?'

'Well, yes, only, Agatha, please don't be unkind about it.'

And the gramophone was playing the song which the black man sang at the
Café de la Paix.

Then the nurse came in.

'Well, you are noisy ones, and no mistake,' she said. 'I don't know what
the matron would say if she were here.'

'Have a chocolate, sister?'

'_Ooh, chocs!_'

Adam made another cocktail.

Miles sat on Miss Runcible's bed and took up the telephone and began
dictating some paragraphs about the nursing home.

'What it is to have a friend in the Press,' said the nurse.

Adam brought her a cocktail. 'Shall I?' she said. 'I hope you haven't
made it too strong. Suppose it goes to my head? What would the patients
think if their sister came in tiddly. Well, if you're _sure_ it won't
hurt me, thanks.'

'_... Yesterday I visited the Hon. Agatha Runcible comma Lord Chasm's
lovely daughter comma at the Wimpole Street nursing home where she is
recovering from the effects of the motor accident recently described in
this column stop Miss Runcible was entertaining quite a large party
which included..._'

Adam, handing round cocktails, came to Nina.

'I thought we were never going to meet each other again.'

'We were obviously bound to, weren't we?'

'Agatha's looking better than I expected, isn't she? What an amusing
nursing home.'

'Nina, I must see you again. Come back to Lottie's this evening and have
dinner with me.'

'No.'

'_Please._'

'No. Ginger wouldn't like it.'

'Nina, you aren't in love with him?'

'No, I don't think so.'

'Are you in love with me?'

'I don't know... I was once.'

'Nina, I'm absolutely miserable not seeing you. Do come and dine with me
to-night. What can be the harm in that?'

'My dear, I know exactly what it will mean.'

'Well, why not?'

'You see, Ginger's not like us really about that sort of thing. He'd be
furious.'

'Well, what about me? Surely I have first claim?'

'Darling, don't _bully_. Besides, I used to play with Ginger as a child.
His hair was a very pretty colour then.'



'_... Mr "Johnny" Hoop, whose memoirs are to be published next month,
told me that he intends to devote his time to painting in future, and is
going to Paris to study in the spring. He is to be taken into the studio
of..._'



'For the last time, Nina...'

'Well, I suppose I must.'

'_Angel!_'

'I believe you knew I was going to.'



'_... Miss Nina Blount, whose engagement to Mr "Ginger" Littlejohn,
the well-known polo player.... Mr Schwert..._'



'If only you were as rich as Ginger, Adam, or only half as rich. Or if
only you had any money at all.'

'Well,' said the Matron, appearing suddenly. 'Whoever heard of cocktails
and a gramophone in a concussion case? Sister Briggs, pull down those
curtains at once. Out you go, the whole lot of you. Why, I've known
cases die with less.'

Indeed, Miss Runcible was already showing signs of strain. She was
sitting bolt upright in bed, smiling deliriously, and bowing her
bandaged head to imaginary visitors.

'_Darling_,' she said. 'How _too_ divine... _how_ are you? ... and
how are _you_? ... how angelic of you all to come... only you must
be careful not to fall out at the corners... ooh, just missed it.
There goes that nasty Italian car... I wish I knew which thing was
which in this car... darling, do try and drive more straight, my
sweet, you were nearly into me then.... Faster...'

'That's all right, Miss Runcible, that's all right. You mustn't get
excited,' said the Matron. 'Sister Briggs, run for the ice-pack
quickly.'

'All friends here,' said Miss Runcible, smiling radiantly.
'Faster.... Faster... it'll stop all right when the time comes...'

That evening Miss Runcible's temperature went rocketing up the chart in
a way which aroused great interest throughout the nursing home. Sister
Briggs, over her evening cup of cocoa, said she would be sorry to lose
that case. Such a nice bright girl—but terribly excitable.

At Shepheard's Hotel Lottie said to Adam:

'That chap's been in here again after you.'

'What chap, Lottie?'

'How do I know what chap? Same chap as before.'

'You never told me about a chap.'

'Didn't I dear? Well, I meant to.'

'What did he want?'

'I don't know—something about money. Dun, I expect. Says he is coming
back to-morrow.'

'Well, tell him I've gone to Manchester.'

'That's right, dear.... What about a glass of wine?'



Later that evening Nina said: 'You don't seem to be enjoying yourself
very much to-night.'

'Sorry, am I being a bore?'

'I think I shall go home.'

'Yes.'

'Adam, darling, what's the matter?'

'I don't know.... Nina, do you ever feel that things simply can't go
on much longer?'

'What d'you mean by things—us or everything?'

'Everything.'

'No—I wish I did.'

'I dare say you're right... what are you looking for?'

'Clothes.'

'Why?'

'Oh, Adam, what _do_ you want... you're too impossible this evening.'

'Don't let's talk any more, Nina, d'you mind?'

Later he said: 'I'd give anything in the world for something different.'

'Different from me or different from everything?'

'Different from everything... only I've got nothing... what's the
good of talking?'

'Oh, Adam, my dearest...'

'Yes?'

'Nothing.'



When Adam came down next morning Lottie was having her morning glass of
champagne in the parlour.

'So your little bird's flown, has she? Sit down and have a glass of
wine. That dun's been in again. I told him you was in Manchester.'

'Splendid.'

'Seemed rather shirty about it. Said he'd go and look for you.'

'Better still.'

Then something happened which Adam had been dreading or days. Lottie
suddenly said:

'And that reminds me. What about _my_ little bill?'

'Oh, yes,' said Adam, 'I've been meaning to ask for it. Have it made out
and sent up to me some time, will you?'

'I've got it here. Bless you, what a lot you seem to have drunk.'

'Yes, I do, don't I? Are you sure some of this champagne wasn't the
Judge's?'

'Well, it may have been,' admitted Lottie. 'We get a bit muddled with
the books now and then.'

'Well, thank you so much, I'll send you down a cheque for this.'

'No, dear,' said Lottie. 'Suppose you write it down here. Here's the
pen, here's the ink, and here's a blank cheque book.'

(Bills are delivered infrequently and irregularly at Lottie's, but when
they come, there is no getting away from them.) Adam wrote out a cheque
for seventy-eight pounds sixteen shillings.

'And twopence for the cheque,' said Lottie.

_And twopence_, Adam added.

'There's a dear,' said Lottie, blotting the cheque and locking it away
in a drawer. 'Why, look who's turned up. If it isn't Mr Thingummy.'

It was Ginger.

'Good morning, Mrs Crump,' he said rather stiffly.

'Come and sit down and have a glass of wine, dear. Why I knew you before
you were born.'

'Hullo, Ginger,' said Adam.

'Look here, Symes,' said Ginger, looking in an embarrassed manner at the
glass of champagne which had been put into his hand, 'I want to speak to
you. Perhaps we can go somewhere where we shan't be disturbed.'

'Bless you, boys, I won't disturb you,' said Lottie. 'Just you have a
nice talk. I've got lots to see to.'

She left the parlour, and soon her voice could be heard raised in anger
against the Italian waiter.

'Well?' said Adam.

'Look here, Symes,' said Ginger, 'what I mean to say is, what I'm going
to say may sound damned unpleasant, you know, and all that, but look
here, you know, damn it, I mean _the better man won_—not that I mean
I'm the _better_ man. Wouldn't say that for a minute. And, anyway,
Nina's a damn sight too good for either of us. It's just that I've been
lucky. Awful rough luck on you, I mean, and all that, but still, when
you come to think of it, after all, well, look here, damn it, I mean,
d'you see what I mean?'

'Not quite,' said Adam gently. 'Now tell me again. Is it something about
Nina?'

'Yes, it is,' said Ginger in a rush. 'Nina and I are engaged, and I'm
not going to have you butting in or there'll be hell to pay.' He paused,
rather taken aback at his own eloquence.

'What makes you think I'm butting in?'

'Well, hang it all, she dined with you last night, didn't she, and
stayed out jolly late, too.'

'How do you know how late she stayed out?'

'Well, as a matter of fact, you see I wanted to speak to her about
something rather important, so I rang her up once or twice and didn't
get an answer until three o'clock.'

'I suppose you rang her up about every ten minutes?'

'Oh no, damn it, not as often as that,' said Ginger. 'No, no, not as
often as that. I know it sounds rather unsporting and all that, but you
see I wanted to speak to her, and, anyway, when I did get through, she
just said she had a pain and didn't want to talk: _well, I mean to say_.
After all, I mean, one is a gentleman. It isn't as though you were just
a sort of friend of the family, is it? I mean, you were more or less
engaged to her yourself, weren't you, at one time? Well, what would you
have thought if I'd come butting in? You must look at it like that, from
my point of view, too, mustn't you, I mean?'

'Well, I think that's rather what did happen.'

'Oh no, look here, Symes, I mean, damn it; you mustn't say things like
that. D'you know all the time I was out East I had Nina's photograph
over my bed, honest I did. I expect you think that's sentimental and all
that, but what I mean is I didn't stop thinking of that girl once all
the time I was away. Mind you, there were lots of other frightfully
jolly girls out there, and I don't say I didn't sometimes get jolly
pally with them, you know, tennis and gymkhana and all that sort of
thing, I mean, and dancing in the evenings, but never anything serious,
you know. Nina was the only girl I really thought of, and I'd sort of
made up my mind when I came home to look her up, and if she'd have me
... see what I mean? So you see it's awfully rough luck on me when
someone comes butting in. You must see that, don't you?'

'Yes,' said Adam.

'And there's another thing, you know, sentiment and all that apart. I
mean Nina's a girl who likes nice clothes and things, you know, comfort
and all that. Well, I mean to say, of course, her father's a topping old
boy, absolutely one of the best, but he's rather an ass about money, if
you know what I mean. What I mean, Nina's going to be frightfully hard
up, and all that, and I mean you haven't got an awful lot of money, have
you?'

'I haven't any at all.'

'No, I mean, that's what I mean. _Awfully rough on you._ No one thinks
the worse of you, respects you for it, I mean earning a living and all
that. Heaps of fellows haven't any money nowadays. I could give you the
names of dozens of stout fellows, absolute toppers, who simply haven't a
bean. No, all I mean is, when it comes to marrying, then that does make
a difference, doesn't it?'

'What you've been trying to say all this time is that you're not sure of
Nina?'

'Oh, rot, my dear fellow, absolute bilge. Damn it, I'd trust Nina
anywhere, of course I would. After all, damn it, what does being in love
mean if you can't trust a person?'

('What, indeed?' thought Adam), and he said, 'Now, Ginger, tell the
truth. What's Nina worth to you?'

'Good Lord, why what an extraordinary thing to ask; everything in the
world of course. I'd go through fire and water for that girl.'

'Well, I'll sell her to you.'

'No, why, look here, good God, damn it, I mean...'

'I'll sell my share in her for a hundred pounds.'

'You pretend to be fond of Nina and you talk about her like that! Why,
hang it, it's not decent. Besides, a hundred pounds is the deuce of a
lot. I mean, getting married is a damned expensive business, don't you
know. And I'm just getting a couple of polo ponies over from Ireland.
That's going to cost a hell of a lot, what with one thing and another.'

'A hundred down, and I leave Nina to you, I think it's cheap.'

'Fifty.'

'A hundred.'

'Seventy-five.'

'A hundred.'

'I'm damned if I'll pay more than seventy-five.'

'I'll take seventy-eight pounds sixteen and twopence. I can't go lower
than that.'

'All right, I'll pay that. _You really will go away?_'

'I'll try, Ginger. Have a drink.'

'No, thank you... this only shows what an escape Nina's had—poor
little girl.'

'Good-bye, Ginger.'

'Good-bye, Symes.'

'Young Thingummy going?' said Lottie, appearing in the door. 'I was just
thinking about a little drink.'

Adam went to the telephone-box....'Hullo, is that Nina?'

'Who's speaking, please? I don't think Miss Blount is in.'

'Mr Fenwick-Symes.'

'Oh, Adam. I was afraid it was Ginger. I woke up feeling I just couldn't
bear him. He rang up last night just as I got in.'

'I know. Nina, darling, something awful's happened.'

'What?'

'Lottie presented me with her bill.'

'Darling, what _did_ you do?'

'Well, I did something rather extraordinary.... My dear, I sold
_you_.'

'Darling... _who to_?'

'Ginger. You fetched seventy-eight pounds sixteen and twopence.'

'_Well?_'

'And now I never am going to see you again.'

'Oh, but Adam, I think this is beastly of you; I don't want not to see
you again.'

'I'm sorry.... Good-bye, Nina, darling.'

'Good-bye, Adam, my sweet. But I think you're rather a cad.'



Next day Lottie said to Adam, 'You know that chap I said came here
asking for you?'

'The dun?'

'Well, he wasn't a dun. I've just remembered. He's a chap who used to
come here quite a lot until he had a fight with a Canadian. He was here
the night that silly Flossie killed herself on the chandelier.'

'Not the drunk Major?'

'He wasn't drunk yesterday. Not so as you'd notice anyway. Red-faced
chap with an eyeglass. You ought to remember him, dear. He was the one
made that bet for you on the November Handicap.'

'But I must get hold of him at once. What's his name?'

'Ah, that I couldn't tell you. I _did_ know, but it's slipped my memory.
He's gone to Manchester to look for you. Pity your missing him!'

Then Adam rang up Nina. 'Listen,' he said. 'Don't do anything sudden
about Ginger. I may be able to buy you back. The drunk Major has turned
up again.'

'But, darling, it's too late. Ginger and I got married this morning. I'm
just packing for our honeymoon. We're going in an aeroplane.'

'Ginger wasn't taking any chances, was he? Darling, don't go.'

'No, I must. Ginger says he knows a "tophole little spot not far from
Monte with a very decent nine-hole golf course".'

'_Well?_'

'_Yes, I know_... we shall only be away a few days. We're coming back
to spend Christmas with papa. Perhaps we shall be able to arrange
something when we get back. I do hope so.'

'Good-bye.'

'Good-bye.'



Ginger looked out of the aeroplane: 'I say, Nina,' he shouted, 'when you
were young did you ever have to learn a thing out of a poetry book
about: "_This scepter'd isle, this earth of majesty, this something or
other Eden_"? D'you know what I mean? "_this happy breed of men, this
little world, this precious stone set in the silver sea..._

     "_This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England_
     _This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings_
     _Feared by their breed and famous by their birth..._"

I forget how it goes on. Something about a stubborn Jew. But you know
the thing I mean?'

'It comes in a play.'

'No, a blue poetry book.'

'I acted in it.'

'Well, they may have put it into a play since. It was in a blue poetry
book when I learned it. Anyway, you know what I mean?'

'Yes, why?'

'Well, I mean to say, don't you feel somehow, up in the air like this
and looking down and seeing everything underneath. I mean, don't you
have a sort of feeling rather like that, if you see what I mean?'

Nina looked down and saw inclined at an odd angle a horizon of
straggling red suburb; arterial roads dotted with little cars;
factories, some of them working, others empty and decaying; a disused
canal; some distant hills sown with bungalows; wireless masts and
overhead power cables; men and women were indiscernible except as tiny
spots; they were marrying and shopping and making money and having
children. The scene lurched and tilted again as the aeroplane struck a
current of air.

'I think I'm going to be sick,' said Nina.

'Poor little girl,' said Ginger. 'That's what the paper bags are for.'



There was rarely more than a quarter of a mile of the black road to be
seen at one time. It unrolled like a length of cinema film. At the edges
was confusion; a fog spinning past: '_Faster, faster_,' they shouted
above the roar of the engine. The road rose suddenly and the white car
soared up the sharp ascent without slackening speed. At the summit of
the hill there was a corner. Two cars had crept up, one on each side,
and were closing in. 'Faster,' cried Miss Runcible, 'Faster.'

'Quietly, dear, quietly. You're disturbing every one. You must lie quiet
or you'll never get well. Everything's quite all right. There's nothing
to worry about. Nothing at all.'

They were trying to make her lie down. How could one drive properly
lying down?

Another frightful corner. The car leant over on two wheels, tugging
outwards; it was drawn across the road until it was within a few inches
of the bank. One ought to brake down at the corners, but one couldn't
see them coming lying flat on one's back like this. The back wheels
wouldn't hold the road at this speed. Skidding all over the place.

'_Faster. Faster._'

The stab of a hypodermic needle.

'There's nothing to worry about, dear... _nothing at all...
nothing_.'