MR. BETTISON PROPOSES


Mr. Bettison could make nothing of Diana of late. Her demeanour, at
first so charming and so cheerful, had become listless, and even
chilling. She seemed hardly to listen to some of his best tales, and
twice she actually forgot to laugh at what was surely a most witty
pleasantry. It struck him that she regarded him with a resentful eye, as
if she objected to his presence at Horton House, and had no desire to be
courted. But Mr. Bettison was far too egotistic to believe such a thing,
and he brushed the incredible suspicion away, deciding that her coldness
was due to a very proper shyness. He continued his visits until they
became so frequent that scarce a day passed without his strutting step
being heard approaching the house and his voice inquiring for the Miss
Beauleighs. Mr. Beauleigh, who secretly hoped for Mr. Bettison as a
son-in-law, would not permit the ladies to deny themselves, and he
further counselled Miss Betty to absent herself after the first few
moments, leaving the young couple together. Thus it was that it so
continually fell to Diana's lot to receive the Squire and to listen to
his never-ending monologues. She persistently snubbed him, hoping to
ward off the impending proposal, but either her snubs were not severe
enough, or Mr. Bettison's skin was too thick to feel them; for not a
fortnight after my lord's departure, he begged her hand in marriage. It
was refused him with great firmness, but, taking the refusal for
coquettishness, he pressed his suit still more amorously, and with such
a self-assured air that Mistress Di became indignant.

"Sir," she cried, "it seems you have indeed misread my attitude towards
you!"

Mr. Bettison was struck dumb with amazement. It had never entered his
brain that Diana could seriously refuse him. He could hardly believe his
ears at this quite unmistakable tone of voice, and sat gaping.

"I must beg," continued Diana, "I must beg that you will discontinue
your all-too-frequent visits here. Please do not deem me unkind, but
your persecution of me--I can call it nothing else--is
wearying--and--you will forgive the word--tiresome. I confess I am
surprised that you had not perceived your attentions to be distasteful
to me."

"Distasteful!" cried Mr. Bettison, recovering after two or three
unsuccessful attempts from his speechlessness. "Do you mean what you
say, Miss Diana? That you will not wed me?"

She nodded.

"Yes, Mr. Bettison, I do."

"And that my attentions are displeasing to you! Well, Miss Beauleigh!
Well, indeed!"

Diana softened a little.

"I am indeed sorry that you should have misconstrued--"

"No misconstruction, madam!" snapped the Squire, who was fast losing
control over his temper. "Do you dare aver that you did not encourage me
to visit you?"

"I do, most emphatically!"

"Oh, I see what 'tis! You cannot hoodwink me. 'Twas never thus with you
before that fellow came!"

"Mr. Bettison, I am entirely at a loss, but I desire you to leave this
room before you say aught you may afterwards regret."

He disregarded her.

"You are infatuated by that over-dressed popinjay--that insufferable
Carr, who, from all I hear, is but a shady fellow, and who--"

With a sweeping movement Diana had risen and walked to the bell-rope.
She now pulled it with such vigour that a great peal sounded throughout
the house.

She stood perfectly still, a statue of Disdain, tall, beautiful and
furious, with compressed lips and head held high. Mr. Bettison broke off
and mopped his brow, glaring at her.

Startled Thomas appeared at the door.

"Did you ring, madam?"

"Show Mr. Bettison out," was the proud answer.

The Squire got up awkwardly.

"I am sure I apologise if I said aught that was untrue," he mumbled. "I
hope you will not take my words amiss--"

"I shall try to forget your insults, sir," she replied. "The door,
Thomas!"

Mr. Bettison went out, and his step had lost some of its self-confident
swagger.

For a full minute after the great front door had shut behind him, Diana
stood where she was, and then the colour suddenly flamed in her cheeks,
and she turned and ran out of the room, up the stairs, to her own
chamber, where she indulged in a luxurious fit of crying. From this
enjoyable occupation she was interrupted by a rap on the door, and Miss
Betty's voice desiring to know if she was within.

She instantly started up and with hasty fingers straightened her tumbled
curls.

"Pray enter!" she called, trying to sound jaunty. To complete the
illusion, she started to hum. Her aunt entered.

"I came to see if you had my broidery. I cannot find it, and I am sure
'twas you brought it in from the garden this morning."

"Yes--oh, yes--I am so sorry! 'Tis in that corner on the chair, I
think," replied Diana, keeping her face averted.

Miss Betty cast a shrewd glance at her, and sat down on the sofa with
the air of one who means to stay.

"What is it, my love?" she demanded.

Diana pretended to search for something in a cupboard.

"Nothing, aunt! What should there be?"

"I do not know. 'Tis what I want to find out," answered Miss Betty
placidly.

"There is nought amiss, I assure you!" To prove the truth of this
statement, Diana essayed a laugh. It was a poor attempt, and wavered
pitifully into a sob.

"My pet, don't tell me! You are crying!"

"I--I'm n-not!" avowed Diana, hunting wildly for her
pocket-handkerchief. "'Tis a cold in the head I have had these three
days."

"Indeed, my love? Longer than that, I fear."

"Yes--perhaps so--I--What do you mean?"

"I doubt but what you caught it the day that Mr. Carr left us."

Diana started.

"P-pray, do not be ridiculous, auntie!"

"No, my dear. Come and sit beside me and tell me all about it," coaxed
Miss Betty.

Diana hesitated, gave a damp sniff, and obeyed.

Miss Betty drew her head down on to her shoulder soothingly.

"There, there! Don't cry, my sweet! What has happened?"

"'Tis that odious Mr. Bettison!" sobbed Diana "He--he had the audacity
to ask me to m-marry him!"

"You don't say so, my love! I thought I heard him arrive. So you sent
him about his business?"

"N-not before he had time to insult m-me!"

"Insult you? Di!"

"He--he dared to insinuate--oh no! he accused me outright--of being
infatuated by Mr. Carr! Infatuated!"

Over her head Miss Betty opened her eyes at her own reflection in the
glass.

"The brute! But, of course, 'tis true?"

No answer.

"Is it not?"

The sobs came faster.

"Of--of course 'tis true, but h-how dared he say so?"

"Di, my love, you really are in love with that boy?"

"I--I--I asked him to marry me--and he wouldn't!"

"Good gracious heavens!" Miss Betty was genuinely horrified. "My dear
Diana!"

"N-not outright--b-but he understood--and--he loves me! And I'd do it
again to-morrow, if I could--immodest or no! So there!"

"Yes, yes," soothed Miss Betty hastily. "Tell me all about it." Diana
lifted her head.

"That's all. And he loves me--he does--he does!"

"Did he say so?"

"N-no--but I could tell. And I love him"--sob--"and I'd sooner die than
live without him, and he won't ask me b-because he has not got a
spotless p-past, and he'd be a cur, and horrid things, and my husband
must not be an--an--outcast, and-and--and I don't care!"

Her bewildered aunt unravelled this with difficulty.

"He'd be a cur if he asked you to marry him?" she asked, with knitted
brows.

"Yes. Because he's a highwayman."

"A highwayman! Then 'twas true what he said? Well, well! I should never
have thought it! That nice boy!"

Diana disengaged herself; in her eyes was a threatening gleam.

"Don't dare say a word against him!"

"No, no--of course not! I was only surprised. But I am thankfully glad
he did not ask you, for all that!"

"Glad? How can you be so cruel?"

"My dear, you could not possibly marry--a--a--"

"Common felon!" sobbed Diana. "I can--I can!"

"And heaven alone knows what else he may have done! Why, child, he said
himself that he had a--a spotty past!"

At this her niece gave a tearful giggle.

"La! What ails you now, Di?"

"H-he never said--spotty."

Miss Betty smiled reluctantly.

"A doubtful past, then."

"I don't believe it!"

Her aunt pursed up her lips.

"I won't believe it. He couldn't be wicked. You forget he saved me!"

Miss Betty relented.

"No, I do not, my love; and, to be sure, I think he is a dear boy, but I
also think 'twas very right of him to go away."

She was enveloped in a rapturous embrace.

"Auntie, you know you love him almost as much as I do?"

"No, that I do not!" was the grim retort. "_I_ am not like to want to
marry him!"

There was another watery giggle at this, and Diana went over to the
dressing-table to tidy her hair.

"I doubt I shall never see him again," she said wretchedly. "Oh, auntie,
if you could but have seen his dear, unhappy eyes!"

"Stuff and nonsense! Not see him again, forsooth! He will call upon us
in town. 'Tis but common politeness."

"You forget he is a highwayman, and not like to come nigh us again."

"Well, my dear, if he cares for you as you say he does, he will see to
it that he takes up some decent occupation. Mayhap, he will go into the
army, or what not. Then wait and see if he does not come to you."

"Do you think so?" doubtfully.

"Of course I do, sweetheart! And if he does not try to mend his ways,
and you see him no more--why then, snap your fingers at him, my love,
for he will not be worth one tear!"

Diana sighed and poured out some water to bathe her face with.

"Is not that sensible?" coaxed her aunt.

She raised her head and looked unutterable scorn.

"I think 'tis remarkable silly," she answered. Then her dignity fell
from her. "Oh, are all men such big stupids?" she cried.

"Most of 'em," nodded her aunt.

"But can't he tell that I shall be--oh, so miserable, and that I should
not ruin my life if I married him?"

"My dear, once a man gets an idea into his head, 'tis the very devil to
get it out of him! Not but what I think Master Jack is right, mind you.
And your dear papa and I had looked higher for you. After all--what is
Mr. Carr?"

"He is the only man I will ever marry! So you may cease looking higher
for me! I suppose you want me to marry that great gaby, Sir Denis
Fabian, you are for ever inviting to the house? Or, perhaps, this
gallant Mr. Bettison? Or Mr. Everard? How _can_ you be so unkind?"

"I am not. But I could not bear to see you throw yourself away on a
highwayman, my dear."

Diana ran to her, putting her arms round her neck.

"Dearest auntie, forgive my rudeness! I know you did not mean to be
unkind! But you do not understand--I _love_ him."

"I always said you'd take it badly," nodded Miss Betty gloomily.

"Take what badly?"

"Love. And no man is worth one tear-drop, sweet."

The confident, tender little laugh that answered this statement made her
look at her suddenly changed niece in surprise.

"You don't know," said Diana. Her eyes were soft and luminous. "You just
do not know."

Before Miss Betty could think of a suitable retort, a knock fell on the
door. It was opened, and Thomas was found to be without.

"My Lady O'Hara is below, madam."

For an instant the two ladies stared at one another. Then:

"La and drat!" said Miss Betty. "With the drawing-room in a muddle after
cleaning!"

Diana nodded to the man.

"We will come, Thomas." Then as soon as he had withdrawn, she stared
again at her aunt. "Lady O'Hara! But why?"

"I suppose she felt she must call after Sir Miles had been here so
often. But why, for goodness' sake, must she choose the one day that the
drawing-room is all untidy? Drat again, I say!"

Diana was powdering her little nose, and anxiously looking to see if the
tear-stains had quite vanished.

"'Tis not untidy, Aunt Betty. Oh, I am quite eager to see her--I think
she must be charming, from all Sir Miles said. Do hurry, aunt!"

Miss Betty stuck a pin into her hair and smoothed out her dress.

"And me in this old taffeta!" she grumbled.

Diana swirled round, her own peach-coloured silk rustling fashionably.

"Never mind, dear--you look very sweet. But _do_ be quick!" Miss Betty
suffered herself to be led to the door.

"'Tis all very fine for you, my love, with a new gown fresh on to-day!
Will you just take a look at my petticoat, though?"

"Nonsense, you are beautiful! Come!"

Together they descended the stairs, and went into the drawing-room.

A dainty, very diminutive little lady arose from a chair at their entry,
and came forward with outstretched hands, and such a fascinating smile
that Miss Betty's ill-humour vanished, and she responded to her
visitor's deep curtsy with one of her best jerky dips.

"I am vastly delighted to welcome you, madam," she said primly. "'Tis
good in you to come this long way to see us."

She drew a chair forward for my lady, and presented her niece. Lady
O'Hara gave the girl a swift, scrutinising glance, and curtsied again.

"'Tis a great pleasure to me to meet you at last, Miss Beauleigh," she
smiled. "My husband has told me so much of you, I declare I was all agog
to meet you!"

Diana warmed instantly to the little lady's charm.

"Indeed, madam, we, too, have heard much of you from Sir Miles. _We_
have wanted to meet _you_!"

Lady O'Hara seated herself and nodded briskly.

"I expect he told you some dreadful tales of me," she said happily. "I
must ask your pardon for not having visited you before, but, as I
daresay you know, I have been away, and, gracious me, when I returned
everything seemed topsy-turvy!" She laughed across at Miss Betty. "I
promise you I have had my hands full putting things to rights, Miss
Beauleigh!"

Miss Betty drew her chair closer, and in a minute they were deep in
truly feminine conversation: the prodigious extravagance of the
servants; the helplessness of men-folk when left to themselves, and then
London, its shops, its parks, the newest play.

Lady O'Hara was begged to take a dish of Miss Betty's precious Bohea--a
very high honour indeed--and when Mr. Beauleigh came into the room he
found his sister and daughter seated on either side of a pretty,
animated little lady whom he had never before seen, talking hard, and
partaking of tay and angel cakes. Whereupon he retired hastily and shut
himself up in his library.