HIS GRACE OF ANDOVER


Lady Lavinia dressed herself with even more than her usual care next
afternoon, and well-nigh drove her maid distracted by her flashes of
temper and impatient, contradictory orders. So lengthy was the toilet
that she was only just in her boudoir when his Grace of Andover was
announced. She had no time to tell the footman that she would receive
his Grace, for almost before the words were out of James' mouth, he
stood bowing in the doorway, sure of his welcome.

He was curiously like his sister, this man, and at the same time
curiously unlike. Hers were the high cheek-bones and pinched,
aristocratic nostrils, but the mouth with its thin lips, and the
heavy-lidded green eyes, were totally different. His Grace's brows
slanted up at the corners, and his eyes, though piercing and bright,
were constantly veiled by the black-lashed lids. He wore his own black
hair, unpowdered, and that, together with the black and silver garments
that he always affected, greatly enhanced the natural pallor of his
countenance. Altogether it was a very striking figure that stood just
before the closed white door and bowed to my lady.

Lavinia took an eager step towards him, swinging her pearl-grey
brocades.

"Oh, Tracy!" she cooed, holding out both hands.

His Grace advanced into the room and bent low over them.

"I rejoice to find you within, Lavinia," he said, a faint tinge of
sarcasm running through his smooth tones. "As you perceive, I rode
over." He made a gesture towards his high boots with their
wicked-looking spurs. "No doubt Andrew forgot to give you my letter?"

"No," she said, slipping her hand in his arm. "He remembered in time,
and--oh, Tracy, I was so vastly delighted to have it!"

"I am indeed honoured," he replied. "I am come on a sufficiently
important matter."

"Oh!" She pulled her hand away disappointedly. "Money!"

"You are really wonderful, my dear. As you so crudely remark--money!
Will you not be seated?"

She sank down on the couch dejectedly and watched him take a chair
opposite her.

"Your most noble lord and master lent me a trifling sum the other day,
but very trifling. I am, as usual, hard-pressed. And that young fool
Andrew must needs fall into debt."

My lady opened wide her eyes in surprise.

"Do you tell me you need money from Richard to pay Andrew's debts?" she
asked, frankly incredulous.

"I do not. Is it likely? The remark was purely by the way."

"Well, in any case, Andrew borrowed three thousand from poor Dick only
yesterday. I know, because I heard him speak of it."

His Grace raised his black brows in patient exasperation.

"How unnecessary of Andrew! And how typical! So 'poor Dick' has been
squeezed already?"

"Don't speak like that, Tracy!" she cried. "Dicky is good to me!" She
met his piercing look unflinchingly.

"Now this becomes interesting," drawled the Duke. "Since when have you
come to that conclusion? And why this sudden loyalty?"

"I have _always_ been loyal to him, Tracy! You know I have! I worry
him--and indeed he is very forbearing."

"But how charming of him!"

"No, do not sneer, Tracy! He has promised to take me to London for the
whole winter--"

His Grace leant back in his chair again.

"Now I understand," he said placidly. "I was at a loss before."

"'Tis not that, Tracy! Indeed I realise how kind he is to me. And we
have quarrelled again. We are always quarrelling, and I know 'tis all my
fault."

"What a comfortable conviction, my dear!"

"No, no! 'Tis not comfortable, Tracy! For somehow I cannot change my
disposition, though I _mean_ to be patient and sweet. Tracy, I hate
Wyncham!"

"You hate Wyncham? There was a time--"

"I know, I know! But I never meant to live here always like this! I want
to go to London!"

"I thought you said you were going?"

"Yes, I am! But I want to go with someone who is gay-not--not--"

"In fact, you want distraction, and not with the amiable Richard? Well,
I can conceive that life with him might prove uninspiring. Safe, my
dear, but not exciting."

"I knew you would understand! You see, he does not like me to play at
cards, because I cannot stop! And he cannot see how 'tis that I care
nought for what he calls 'home-life' when there are routs, and the play,
and _real_ life. He--he is so--so--so _staid,_ Tracy, and careful!"

"A good trait in a husband, Lavinia," replied his Grace cynically. "'Tis
because I do not possess it that I am single now."

Her lips curled scornfully at this, for well she knew her brother.

"No, Tracy, that is not so! It is because you are a devil! No woman
would marry you!"

"That is most interesting, my dear," purred his Grace. "But pray strive
to be a little more original. Continue your analysis of Richard's
sterling character."

"'Tis only that we are so different," she sighed. "I always desire to do
things quickly--if I think of something, I want it at once--at once! You
know, Tracy! And he likes to wait and think on it, and--oh, 'tis so
tiresome, and it puts me in a bad humour, and I behave like a hysterical
bourgeoise!" She got up swiftly, clasping her nervous little hands.
"When he speaks to me in that gentle, reasoning way, I could scream,
Tracy! Do you think I am mad?" She laughed unmusically.

"No," he replied, "but the next thing to it: a Belmanoir. Perhaps it was
a pity you ever married Richard. But there is always the money."

"There is not," she cried out sharply.

"Not? What mean you?"

"Tracy, 'tis of this that I wanted to speak! You think my lord left his
money to Dick?"

"Certainly. He should be stupendously wealthy."

"He is not!"

"But, my good girl, the revenue must be enormous. He has the land,
surely?"

"No! No! He has not the land! Oh, but I am angry whenever I think on it!
He induced my lord to leave it to John. _He_ has but his younger son's
portion!"

"I still fail to understand. You informed me that the Earl left all to
Richard?"

"He changed his will, Tracy!"

"He--changed--his--will! Then, my dear, must you have played your cards
very badly!"

"'Twas not my fault, Tracy--indeed 'twas not! I knew nought until the
will was read. Richard never spoke a word to me about it! And now we are
comparatively poor!" Her voice trembled with indignation, but his Grace
only whistled beneath his breath.

"I always knew, of course, that Dick was a fool, but I never guessed how
much so till now!"

At that she flared up.

"He is not a fool! He is an honest man, and 'tis we_--we_, I tell
you--who are mean and despicable and mercenary!"

"Undoubtedly, Lavinia, but pray do not excite yourself over it. I
suppose he is still devoted to that young hothead?"

"Yes, yes--'tis all Jack, Jack, Jack, until I am sick to death of the
sound of his name--and--" She broke off, biting her lip.

"And what?"

"Oh, nought! But 'tis all so disagreeable, Tracy!"

"It certainly is slightly disturbing. You had better have chosen John,
in spite of all, it seems."

She stamped angrily.

"Oh, where's the good in being flippant?"

"My dear Lavinia, where's the good in being anything else? The situation
strikes me as rather amusing. To think of the worthy Richard so neatly
overturning all my plans!"

"If it had not been for you, I might never have married him. Why did you
throw them both in my way? Why did I ever set eyes on either?"

"It should have been a good match, my dear, and, if I remember rightly,
no one was more alive to that fact than yourself."

She pouted angrily and turned her shoulder to him.

"Still," he continued reflectively, "I admit that for the smart lot we
are, we do seem rather to have bungled the affair."

Lavinia swept round upon him.

"Oh, do you care no more than that? How can you be so casual! Does it
affect you not at all?"

He wrinkled his thin nose expressively.

"I shall not weep over it, Lavinia, but 'tis a plaguey nuisance. But we
must see what can be done. And that brings me back to the original
subject. Despite these upsetting revelations, I still require that
money."

"Oh, dear! How much must you have, Tracy?"

"Five hundred might suffice."

"Tracy, do not the estates bring in anything?" she asked petulantly.
"And Andrew told us you had a run of marvellous luck not a fortnight
since?"

"Since then, my dear, I have had three runs of marvellous ill-luck. As
to the estates, they are mortgaged up to the hilt, as you very well
know. What little there is is between three. And Robert is extravagant."

"I hate Robert!"

"I am not partial to him myself, but it makes no odds."

"I wish he might die!--oh no, no! Now I am become ill-natured again--I
don't wish it--only I am so tired of everything. You shall have that
money as soon as possible; but be careful, Tracy--please be careful!
'Tis not easy to get money from Dick!"

"No, I should imagine not. However, we have managed rather well up to
the present, take it all in all."

"Up to the present he has had all the money he wanted. My lord denied
him nought!"

"Well, 'tis unfortunate, as I said before, but it must be endured. Where
is Dick?"

"I know not. You will stay to dinner, Tracy?"

"Thank you. I shall be charmed."

"Yes, yes--oh, how prodigiously pleasant it is to see you again! Soon I
shall come to Andover. Will you let me stay a few days?"

"The question is, will Richard allow you to stay so long in my
contaminating presence?"

"Richard would never keep me away, Tracy!" she replied proudly. "He
_could_ not. Oh, why is it that I don't love him more? Why do I not care
for him as much as I care for you even?"

"My dear Lavinia, like all Belmanoirs, you care first for yourself and
secondly for the man who masters you. That, alas! Richard has not yet
succeeded in doing."

"But I _do_ love Richard. I do, I do, yet--"

"Exactly. 'Yet!' The 'grand passion' has not yet touched you, my dear,
and you are quite self-absorbed."

"Self-absorbed! Those are hard words."

"But not too hard for the case. You think solely of yourself, your own
pleasure, your own character, your own feelings. If you could cast
yourself into the background a little, you would be less excitable and
considerably less discontented."

"How dare you, Tracy! Pray, what of you? Are you so selfless?"

"Not at all. I am precisely the same. I was merely suggesting that you
might be happier an you could depose 'self.'"

"You had best do the same yourself!"

"My dear Lavinia, when I feel the need of greater happiness, I most
undoubtedly shall. At present I am quite content."

"You are unkind!" she protested. "And you sneer at me."

"Pray, accept my heartfelt apologies! You shall come to Andover if the
worthy Richard permits."

Her face cleared as by magic.

"Oh, Tracy! Oh, I am so desirous to be gay once more! I cannot even
receive now, on account of this mourning! But when I am at Andover--oh,
we will not worry over anything, and I can be bad-tempered without
feeling that someone is being hurt by me! Oh, come to Dicky at once--at
once!"

He rose leisurely.

"I can imagine that you try Richard's patience somewhat," he remarked.
"Happily, your impetuosity in no way disturbs me. We will go in search
of Richard."

Half-way down the great staircase she perceived her husband, and flew to
meet him.

"Richard, I was coming in search of you! Tracy has invited me to Andover
for a week--he purposes to ask several people to stay, and there will be
parties--and entertainment! You will let me go? Say yes, Dicky--say yes,
quickly!"

Carstares bowed to his Grace, who stood watching them from the stairs.
The bow was returned with exaggerated flourish. Carstares looked down at
his wife.

"So soon, Lavinia?" he remonstrated, and indicated her mourning. She
shook his hand off impatiently.

"Oh, Dicky, does it matter? What can it signify? I do not ask you to
come--"

"No," he said half-sadly, half-amusedly. "I notice that, my dear."

"No, no! I did not mean to be unkind--you must not think that! You
_don't_ think it, do you, Dick?"

"Oh, no," he sighed.

"Good Dicky!" She patted his cheek coaxingly. "Then you will allow me to
go--ah, but yes, yes, you must listen! You know how dull I am, and how
silly--'tis because I need a change, and I _want_ to go to Andover. I
_want_ to go!"

"Yes, dear, I know. But my father is not yet dead six weeks, and I
cannot think it seemly--"

"Please, Dick, please! Please do not say no! 'Twill make me so unhappy!
Oh, you will not be so unkind? You will not forbid me to go?"

"I ask you not to, Lavinia. If you need a change, I will take you
quietly to Bath, or where you will. Do not pain me by going to Andover
just now."

"Bath! Bath! What do I want with Bath at this time of the year? Oh, 'tis
kind in you to offer, but I want to go to Andover! I want to see all the
old friends again. And I want to get away from everything here--'tis all
so gloomy--after--after my lord's death!"

"Dearest, of course you shall go away--but if only you would remember
that you are in mourning--"

"But 'tis what I wish to forget! Oh, Dicky, don't, don't, don't be
unkind."

"Very well, dear. If you must go--go."

She clapped her hands joyfully.

"Oh thank you, Dicky! And you are not angry with me?"

"No, dear, of course not."

"Ah! Now I am happy! 'Tis sweet of you, Dicky, but confess you are
secretly thankful to be rid of me for a week! Now are you not?" She
spread out her fan in the highest good-humour and coquetted behind it.
Richard was induced to smile.

"I fear I shall miss you too sadly, dear."

"Oh!" She dropped the fan. "But think how you will look forward to
seeing me again, and I you. Why, I shall be so thankful to be back after
a week away, that I shall be good for months!"

His face lightened, and he caught her hands in his.

"Darling, if I thought you would miss me--"

"But of course I shall miss you, Dick--oh, _pray_, mind my frock! Shall
I not miss him, Tracy?"

Richard suddenly remembered his brother-in-law's presence. He turned and
went to the foot of the stairs.

"So you are determined to wrest my wife from me?" he smiled.

Tracy descended leisurely, opening his snuff-box.

"Yes, I require a hostess," he said. "And I have"--he paused--"induced
her to honour Andover with her presence. Shall we have the felicity of
seeing you at any time?"

"I thank you, no. I am not, you will understand, in the mood for the
gaiety for which my poor Lavinia craves."

The Duke bowed slightly, and they all three went out on to the terrace,
Lavinia laughing and talking as Richard had not heard her laugh or talk
for days. She was the life and soul of the little dinner-party, flirting
prettily with her husband and exerting herself to please him in every
way. She had won her point; therefore she was in excellent spirits with
all the world, and not even the spilling of some wine on her new silk
served to discompose her.