MY LORD AT THE WHITE HART


"Sir Anthony Ferndale" sat before the dressing-table in his room at the
White Hart, idly polishing his nails. A gorgeous silk dressing gown lay
over the back of his chair, and, behind him, Jim was attending to his
wig, at the same time hovering anxiously over the coat and waistcoat
that were waiting to be donned.

Carstares left off polishing his nails, yawned, and leaned back in his
chair, a slim, graceful figure in cambric shirt and apricot satin
breeches. He studied his cravat for some moments in the mirror, and
lifted a hand to it. Salter held his breath. With extreme deliberation
the hand moved a diamond and emerald pin the fraction of an inch to one
side, and fell to his side again. Salter drew a relieved breath, which
brought his master's eyes round to himself.

"No trouble, Jim?"

"None at all, sir."

"Neither had I. 'Twas most surprisingly easy. The birds had no more
fight in them than sparrows. Two men in a coach--one a bullying rascal
of a merchant, the other his clerk. Gad! but I was sorry for that little
man!" He paused, his hand on the rouge pot.

Salter looked an inquiry.

"Yes," nodded Carstares. "Very sorry. The fat man would appear to bully
and browbeat him after the manner of his kind; he even blamed him for my
advent, the greasy coward! Yes, Jim, you are right--he did not appeal to
me, _ce M. Fudby_. So--" ingenuously, "I relieved him of his cash-box
and two hundred guineas. A present for the poor of Lewes."

Jim jerked his shoulder, frowning.

"If ye give away all ye get, sir, why do ye rob at all?" he asked
bluntly.

His whimsical little smile played about my lord's mouth.

"'Tis an object for my life, Jim: a noble object. And I believe it
amuses me to play Robin Hood--take from the rich to give to the poor,"
he added, for Salter's benefit. "But to return to my victims--you would
have laughed had you but seen my little man come tumbling out of the
coach when I opened the door!"

"Tumble, sir? Why should he do that?"

"He was at pains to explain the reason. It seems he had been commanded
to hold the door to prevent my entering--so when I jerked it open,
sooner than loose his hold, he fell out on to the road. Of course, I
apologised most abjectly--and we had some conversation. Quite a nice
little man.... It made me laugh to see him sprawling on the road,
though!"

"Wish I could have seen it, your honour. I would ha' liked fine to ha'
been beside ye." He looked down at the lithe form with some pride. "I'd
give something to see ye hold up a coach, sir!"

Haresfoot in hand, Jack met his admiring eyes in the glass, and laughed.

"I make no doubt you would.... I have cultivated a superb voice, a
trifle thick and beery, a little loud, perhaps--ah, something to dream
of o' nights! I doubt they do, too," he added reflectively, and affixed
the patch at the corner of his mouth.

"So? A little low, you think? But 'twill suffice--What's toward?"

Down below in the street there was a great stirring and bustling:
horses' hoofs, shouts from the ostlers, and the sound of wheels on the
cobble-stones. Jim went to the window and looked down, craning his neck
to see over the balcony.

"'Tis a coach arrived, sir."

"That much had I gathered," replied my lord, busy with the powder.

"Yes, sir. O lord, sir!" He was shaken with laughter.

"What now?"

"'Tis the curiousest sight, sir! Two gentlemen, one fat and t'other
small! One's all shrivelled-looking, like a spider, while t'other--"

"Resembles a hippopotamus--particularly in the face?"

"Well yes, sir. He do rather. And he be wearing purple."

"Heavens, yes! Purple, and an orange waistcoat!"

Jim peered afresh.

"So it is, sir! But how did you know?" Even as he put the question,
understanding flashed into Jim's eyes.

"I rather think that I have had the honour of meeting these gentlemen,"
replied my lord placidly. "My buckle, Jim.... Is't a prodigious great
coach with wheels picked out in yellow?"

"Ay, your honour. The gentlemen seem a bit put out, too."

"That is quite probable. Does the smaller gentleman wear
somewhat--ah--muddied garments?"

"I can't see, sir; he stands behind the fat gentleman."

"Mr. Bumble Bee.... Jim!"

"Sir!" Jim turned quickly at the sound of the sharp voice.

He found that my lord had risen, and was holding up a waistcoat of
pea-green pattern on a bilious yellow ground, between a disgusted finger
and thumb. Before his severe frown Jim dropped his eyes and stood
looking for all the world like a schoolboy detected in some crime.

"You put this--this monstrosity--out for _me_ to wear?" in awful tones.

Jim eyed the waistcoat gloomily and nodded.

"Yes, sir."

"Did I not specify cream ground?"

"Yes, sir. I thought--I thought that 'twas cream!"

"My good friend, it is--it is--I cannot say what it is. And pea-green!"
he shuddered. "Remove it."

Jim hurried forward and disposed of the offending garment.

"And bring me the broidered satin. Yes, that is it. It is particularly
pleasing to the eye."

"Yes, sir," agreed the abashed Jim.

"You are excused this time," added my lord, with a twinkle in his eye.
"What are our two friends doing?"

Salter went back to the window

"They've gone into the house, sir. No, here's the spider gentleman! He
do seem in a hurry, your honour!"

"Ah!" murmured his lordship. "You may assist me into this coat. Thanks."

With no little difficulty, my lord managed to enter into the fine satin
garment, which, when on, seemed moulded to his back, so excellently did
it fit. He shook out his ruffles and slipped the emerald ring on to his
finger with a slight frown.

"I believe I shall remain here some few days," he remarked presently.
"To--ah--allay suspicion." He looked across at his man as he spoke,
through his lashes.

It was not in Jim's nature to inquire into his master's affairs, much
less to be surprised at anything he might do or say. He was content to
receive and promptly execute his orders, and to worship Carstares with a
dog-like devotion, following blindly in his wake, happy as long as he
might serve him.

Carstares had found him in France, very down upon his luck, having been
discharged from the service of his late master owing to the penniless
condition of that gentleman's pocket. He had engaged him as his own
personal servant, and the man had remained with him ever since, proving
an invaluable acquisition to my Lord John. Despite a singularly wooden
countenance, he was by no means a fool, and he had helped Carstares out
of more than one tight corner during his inglorious and foolhardy career
as highwayman. He probably understood his somewhat erratic master better
than anyone else, and he now divined what was in his mind. He returned
that glance with a significant wink.

"'Twas them gentlemen ye held up to-day, sir?" he asked, jerking an
expressive thumb towards the window.

"M'm. Mr. Bumble Bee and friend. It would almost appear so. I think I do
not fully appreciate Mr. Bumble Bee. I find his conduct rather tiresome.
But it is just possible that he thinks the same of me. I will further my
acquaintance with him."

Jim grunted scornfully, and an inquiring eye was cocked at him.

"You do not admire our friend? Pray, do not judge him by his exterior.
He may possess a beautiful mind. But I do not think so. N-no, I really
do not think so." He chuckled a little. "Do you know, Jim, I believe I
am going to enjoy myself to-night!"

"I don't doubt it, your honour. 'Twere child's play to trick the fat
gentleman."

"Probably. But it is not with the fat gentleman that I shall have to
deal. 'Tis with all the officials of this charming town, an I mistake
not. Do I hear the small spider returning?"

Salter stepped back to the window.

"Ay, sir--with three others."

"Pre-cisely. Be so good as to hand me my snuff-box. And my cane. Thank
you. I feel the time has now come for me to put in an appearance. Pray,
bear in mind that I am new come from France and journey by easy stages
to London. And cultivate a stupid expression. Yes, that will do
excellently."

Jim grinned delightedly; he had assumed no expression of stupidity, and
was consequently much pleased with this pleasantry. He swung open the
door with an air, and watched "Sir Anthony" mince along the passage to
the stairs.

In the coffee-room the city merchant, Mr. Fudby by name, was relating
the story of his wrongs, with many an impressive pause, and much
emphasis, to the mayor, town-clerk, and beadle of Lewes. All three had
been fetched by Mr. Chilter, his clerk, in obedience to his orders, for
the bigger the audience the better pleased was Mr. Fudby. He was now
enjoying himself quite considerably, despite the loss of his precious
cash-box.

So was not Mr. Hedges, the mayor. He was a fussy little man who suffered
from dyspepsia; he was not interested in the affair, and he did not see
what was to be done for Mr. Fudby. Further, he had been haled from his
dinner, and he was hungry; and, above all, he found Mr. Fudby very
unattractive. Still, a highroad robbery was serious matter enough, and
some course of action must be thought out; so he listened to the story
with an assumption of interest, looking exceedingly wise, and, at the
proper moments, uttering sounds betokening concern.

The more he saw and heard of Mr. Fudby, the less he liked him. Neither
did the town-clerk care for him. There was that about Mr. Fudby that did
not endear him to his fellow-men, especially when they chanced to be his
inferiors in the social scale. The beadle did not think much about
anything. Having decided (and rightly) that the affair had nothing
whatever to do with him, he leaned back in his chair and stared stolidly
up at the ceiling.

The tale Mr. Fudby was telling bore surprisingly little resemblance to
the truth. It was a much embellished version, in which he himself had
behaved with quite remarkable gallantry. It had been gradually concocted
during the journey to Lewes.

He was still holding forth when my lord entered the room. Carstares
raised his glass languidly to survey the assembled company, bowed
slightly, and walked over to the fire. He seated himself in an armchair
and took no further notice of anybody.

Mr. Hedges had recognised at a glance that here was some _grand
seigneur_ and wished that Mr. Fudby would not speak in so loud a voice.
But that individual, delighted at having a new auditor, continued his
tale with much relish and in a still louder tone.

My lord yawned delicately and took a pinch of snuff.

"Yes, yes," fussed Mr. Hedges. "But, short of sending to London for the
Runners, I do not see what I can do. If I send to London, it must, of
course, be at your expense, sir."

Mr. Fudby bristled.

"At _my_ expense, sir? Do ye say at _my_ expense? I am surprised! I
repeat--I am surprised!"

"Indeed, sir? I can order the town-crier out, describing the horse,
and--er--offering a reward for the capture of any man on such an
animal. But--" he shrugged and looked across at the town-clerk--"I do
not imagine that 'twould be of much use--eh, Mr. Brand?"

The clerk pursed his lips and spread out his hands.

"I fear not; I very much fear not. I would advise Mr. Fudby to have a
proclamation posted up round the country." He sat back with the air of
one who has contributed his share to the work, and does not intend to
offer any more help.

"Ho!" growled Mr. Fudby. He blew out his cheeks. "'Twill be a grievous
expense, though I suppose it must be done, and I cannot but feel that if
it had not been for your deplorably cowardly conduct, Chilter--yes,
cowardly conduct, I say--I might never have been robbed of my two
hundred!" He snuffled a little, and eyed the flushed but silent Chilter
with mingled reproach and scorn. "However, my coachman assures me he
could swear to the horse again, although he cannot remember much about
the man himself. Chilter! How did he describe the horse?"

"Oh--er--chestnut, Mr. Fudby--chestnut, with a half-moon of white on its
forehead, and one white foreleg."

Jack perceived that it was time he took a hand in the game. He half
turned in his chair and levelled his quizzing-glass at Mr. Chilter.

"I beg your pardon?" he drawled.

Mr. Fudby's eye brightened. The fine gentleman was roused to an
expression of interest at last. He launched forth into his story once
more for my lord's benefit. Carstares eyed him coldly, seeing which, Mr.
Hedges came hurriedly to the rescue.

"Er--yes, Mr. Fudby--quite so! Your pardon, sir, I have not the honour
of knowing your name?"

"Ferndale," supplied Jack, "Sir Anthony Ferndale."

"Er--yes--" Mr. Hedges bowed. "Pray pardon my importuning you with
our--"

"Not at all," said my lord.

"No--quite so--The fact is, these--er--gentlemen have had
the--er--misfortune to be waylaid on their journey here."

Sir Anthony's glass was again levelled at the group. His expression
betokened mild surprise.

"_All_ these gentlemen?" he inquired blandly. "Dear, dear!"

"Oh, no, no, no, sir! Not all--Only Mr.--er--"

"Fudby," said that worthy, and discovered that Sir Anthony was bowing
frigidly. At once he rose, and resting his knuckles on the table before
him, bent his body slowly and painfully. Sir Anthony inclined his head.
Whereupon, to the delight of all the rest, Mr. Fudby bowed again with
even greater stateliness than before. Mr. Hedges observed Sir Anthony's
lips to twitch convulsively. He waited for Mr. Fudby to subside, and
then continued:

"Yes--Mr. Fudby and Mr.--"

"My clerk!" snapped Fudby.

Sir Anthony favoured Mr. Chilter with his peculiarly sweet smile, and
turned again to Mr. Hedges.

"I see. A _daylight_ robbery, you say?"

"Broad daylight!" boomed Mr. Fudby.

"Er--yes, yes," interposed the mayor, fearing a fresh outbreak from that
quarter. "I wonder if you have seen anything of such an animal as
Mr.--er--Chilter--described?"

"'Tis a most extraordinary thing," said Carstares slowly, "but I have
just bought such an one." He glanced round with an inquiring smile and
one eyebrow lifted.

"Well!" ejaculated Mr. Fudby. "Well!"

"Dear me, sir, what a strange coincidence! May I ask where you bought
it, and from whom?"

"She has not been in my possession over two hours. I bought her from an
out-at-elbows ruffian, on my way hither. I thought at one time that
'twas strange that the man should possess such a mare--pure bred, I
vow--and wondered why he was so eager to be rid of her."

"He was eager because he knew he would be recognised by her," explained
Mr. Fudby kindly.

"Without doubt. Perhaps you would like to see her? I will send my man--"

"Oh no, no!" cried the mayor. "We would not dream of so inconveniencing
you--"

"'Twere a pleasure," bowed Jack, devoutly hoping that Mr. Fudby would
not require to see Jenny, who, he felt sure, would betray him by her
very evident affection.

"No, no, Sir Anthony, 'tis quite unnecessary, I assure you, but I thank
you for all that. Mr. Fudby, if you would describe the man himself, I
will see to the proclamation."

"Describe him, Chilter!" ordered Mr. Fudby, who was becoming rather
grumpy.

Mr. Chilter smiled suddenly.

"Certainly, sir!" he said with alacrity. "'Twas a great ruffianly
fellow, monstrous tall--"

"How tall?" interrupted the town-clerk. "Six feet?"

"Oh, quite!" lied Mr. Chilter. "And fat."

Jack's shoulders shook.

"Fat, you say?" he asked gently.

"Very fat," affirmed Mr. Chilter. "And prodigious rough, swearing
dreadfully in his speech."

"You could not see his face, I suppose?"

Mr. Chilter hesitated.

"I could see his mouth and chin," he said, "and I remarked a long scar
running from his under-lip to the--er--bottom of his face."

Involuntarily Carstares' hand caressed his perfectly smooth chin. Either
the little clerk was a born romancer, or for some reason or other he did
not want the highwayman to be taken.

"Well, Sir Anthony?" the mayor was saying. "Does that description fit
your man?"

My lord frowned thoughtfully.

"Tall," he said slowly, "and fat--you said fat, I think, Mr. Chilter?"

Rather anxiously Mr. Chilter reiterated this statement.

"Ah! And with a long scar--yes, that is undoubtedly he. Furthermore," he
added audaciously, "he has a squint in his left eye. 'Tis a most
ill-favoured rogue in all."

"It would appear so, Sir Anthony," remarked the mayor drily. He did not
in the least believe the story of the squint, and imagined that the fine
court gentleman was amusing himself at their expense. Nevertheless, he
had no intention of remonstrating; the sooner he could withdraw from
this very tiresome affair the better. So he gravely took down all the
absurd particulars, remarked that the man should be easy to find, and
made ready to depart.

The town-clerk rose, and tapped the beadle on the shoulder, whereupon
that worthy, with a grunt, abandoned his pose of masterly inactivity and
followed the mayor out of the room.

Mr. Fudby rose.

"I doubt I shall never see my money again," he said pettishly. "If you,
Chilter had not been so--"

"Allow me to offer you some snuff, Mr. Chilter," interposed my lord
gently, extending his jewelled box. "Doubtless, sir, you would wish to
see my mare?"

"I know nought of horses," snorted Mr. Fudby. "'Tis my clerk who appears
to have remarked all the details." He sneered terrifically.

"Then pray, do me the honour of walking as far as the stables, Mr.
Chilter. 'Twere as well to be certain about the mare. Mr.-ah--Fudby,
your servant."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And now, Mr. Chilter, I have a grudge against you," said Carstares, as
they walked across the little garden.

"Me, sir? Oh--er--have you, Sir Anthony?"

He looked up and perceived that the gentleman was laughing.

"Yes, Mr. Chilter, a very serious grudge: you have described me as fat!"

Chilter nearly fainted.

"_You_, sir," he gasped, and stared in amazement.

"Also that I swear dreadfully in my speech, and that I have a scar
running from my mouth to my chin."

Mr. Chilter stood stock-still in the middle of the path.

"It was you, sir, all the time? _You_ held us up? Were _you_ the man who
wrenched open the door?"

"I was that infamous scoundrel. I beg leave once more to apologise for
my carelessness in opening that same door. Now tell me, why did you
take such pains to throw dust in their sleepy eyes?"

They resumed their walk slowly. The little clerk flushed.

"I scarce know, sir, save that I--that I liked you, and--and--"

"I see. 'Twas prodigious good of you, Mr. Chilter. I wonder if there is
anything that I can do to show my gratitude?"

Again the clerk flushed and lifted his head proudly.

"I thank you, sir, but there is nought."

By now they had reached the stable. Carstares opened the door and they
entered.

"Then will you accept this in token of my regard, sir?"

Mr. Chilter gazed at the emerald ring that glowed and winked at him from
the palm of my lord's hand. He looked up into the blue eyes and
stammered a little.

"Indeed, sir--I--I--"

"'Tis honestly come by!" pleadingly. "Come, Mr. Chilter, you'll not hurt
my feelings by refusing? You will keep it in remembrance of a man--a fat
man, Mr. Chilter--who rudely jerked you on to the road?"

The clerk took it with unsteady fingers.

"I thank you most--"

"Nay, I beg of you. 'Tis I thank you for aiding me so kindly.... Come
and see my Jenny! Well, lass?" For the mare at the first sound of his
voice had turned in her loose-box, and was whinnying and pawing the
ground eagerly.

"I do not understand, sir, anything: how it is that you are a
highwayman, or why you have honoured me with your confidence--why you
should trust me. But--thank you."

As he spoke, Mr. Chilter placed his hand in my lord's, and for the
second time in his life, felt the pressure of those firm, kindly
fingers.

"Why, your honour! Ye've lost your emerald!"

"No, Jim. I gave it away."

"Ye--ye _gave_ it away, sir?"

"M'm. To the small spider."

"B-but--"

"And he called me fat, too."

"Called ye fat, sir?" asked the man, bewildered.

"Yes. Very fat. By the way, let me tell you that I bought Jenny at
Fittering to-day from the naughty ruffian who waylaid Mr. Bumble Bee."
He proceeded to give Jim a sketch of what had transpired below. When he
had finished the man shook his head severely.

"I doubt ye'll never learn wisdom, sir," he scolded.

"I? What have I done?"

"What did ye want to tell it all to the spider man for, sir? 'Twas most
incautious of ye. Like as not, he'll split to the fat gentleman, and
we'll have the whole town at our heels."

"Which just shows all you know of the small spider," replied his master
calmly. "Hand me the powder."