BATH: 29 QUEEN SQUARE


The autumn and the winter passed smoothly, and April found the Carstares
installed at Bath, whither Lady Lavinia had teased her husband into
going, despite his desire to return to Wyncham and John. She herself did
not care to be with the child, and was perfectly content that Richard
should journey occasionally to Wyncham to see that all was well with
him.

On the whole, she had enjoyed the winter, for she had induced Richard to
open Wyncham House, Mayfair, the Earl's town residence, where she had
been able to hold several entirely successful routs, and many select
little card-parties. Admirers she had a-many, and nothing so pleased her
vain little heart as masculine adulation. Carstares never entered his
home without stumbling against some fresh flame of hers, but as they
mostly consisted of what he rudely termed the lap-dog type, he was
conscious of no jealous qualms, and patiently submitted to their
inundation of his house. He was satisfied that Lavinia was happy, and,
as he assured himself at times when he was most tried, nothing else
signified.

The only flaw to Lavinia's content was the need of money. Not that she
was stinted, or ever refused anything that he could in reason give her;
but her wants were never reasonable. She would demand a new town
chariot, upholstered in pale blue, not because her own was worn or
shabby, but because she was tired of its crimson cushions. Or she would
suddenly take a fancy to some new, and usually fabulously expensive toy,
and having acquired it, weary of it in a week.

Without a murmur, Richard gave her lap-dogs (of the real kind), black
pages, jewels, and innumerable kickshaws, for which she rewarded him
with her brightest smiles and tenderest caresses. But when she required
him to refurnish Wyncham House in the style of the French Court,
throwing away all the present Queen Anne furniture, the tapestries, and
the countless old trappings that were one and all so beautiful and so
valuable, he put his foot down with a firmness that surprised her. Not
for any whim of hers was Jack's house to be spoiled. Neither her coaxing
nor her tears had any effect upon Richard, and when she reverted to
sulks, he scolded her so harshly that she was frightened, and in
consequence silenced.

For a week she thought and dreamt of nothing but gilded French chairs,
and then abruptly, as all else, the fancy left her, and she forgot all
about it. Her mantua-maker's bills were enormous, and caused Richard
many a sleepless night, but she was always so charmingly penitent that
he could not find it in his heart to be angry; and, after all, he
reflected, he would rather have his money squandered on her adornment
than on that of her brothers. She was by turns passionate and cold to
him: one day enrapturing him by some pretty blandishment, the next
snapping peevishly when he spoke to her.

At the beginning of the season he dutifully conducted her to routs and
_bals masqués_, but soon she began to go always with either Andrew or
Robert, both of whom were in town, and whose casual chaperonage she much
preferred to Richard's solicitous care. Tracy was rarely in London for
more than a few days at a time, and the Carstares, greatly to Richard's
relief, saw but little of him. Carstares disliked Colonel Lord Robert
Belmanoir, but the Duke he detested, not only for his habitual sneer
towards him, but for the influence that he undoubtedly held over
Lavinia. Richard was intensely jealous of this, and could sometimes
hardly bring himself to be civil when his Grace visited my lady. Whether
justly or not, he inwardly blamed Tracy for all Lavinia's crazy whims
and periodical fits of ill-temper. It did not take his astute Grace long
to discover this, and with amused devilry he played upon it, encouraging
Lavinia in her extravagance, and making a point of calling on her
whenever he was in town.

Carstares never knew when not to expect to find him there; he came and
went to and from London with no warning whatsoever. No one ever knew
where he was for more than a day at a time, and no one was in the least
surprised if he happened to be seen in London when he should, according
to all accounts, have been in Paris. They merely shrugged their
shoulders, and exchanged glances, murmuring: "Devil Belmanoir!" and
wondering what fresh intrigue he was in.

So altogether Richard was not sorry when my lady grew suddenly sick of
town and was seized with a longing for Bath. He had secretly hoped that
she might return to Wyncham, but when she expressed no such wish, he
stifled his own longing for home, shut up the London house, and took her
and all her baggage to Bath, installing her in Queen Square in one of
the most elegantly furnished houses in the place.

Lady Lavinia was at first charmed to be there again; delighted with the
house, and transported over the excellencies of the new French milliner
she had discovered.

But the milliner's bills proved monstrous, and the drawing-room of her
house not large enough for the routs she contemplated giving. The air
was too relaxing for her, and she was subject to constant attacks of the
vapours that were as distressing to her household as they were to
herself. The late hours made her head ache as it never ached in London,
and the damp gave her a cold. Furthermore, the advent of an attractive
and exceedingly wealthy little widow caused her many a bitter hour, to
the considerable detriment of her good-temper.

She was lying on a couch in her white and gilt drawing room one
afternoon--alas! the craze for French furniture was o'er-smelling-bottle
in hand and a _bona fide_ ache in her head, when the door opened and
Tracy walked into the room.

"Good heavens!" she said faintly, and uncorked her salts.

It was his Grace's first appearance since she had come to Bath, and the
fact that he had politely declined an invitation that she had sent to
him still rankled in her mind. He bowed over the limp hand that she
extended, and looked her up and down.

"I regret to find you thus indisposed, my dear sister," he said
smoothly.

"'Tis nought. Only one of my stupid headaches. I am never well here, and
this house is stuffy," she answered fretfully.

"You should take the waters," he said, scrutinising, through his
eyeglass, the chair to which she had waved him. "It has an unstable
appearance, my dear; I believe I prefer the couch." He moved to a
smaller sofa and sat down.

"Pray, how long have you been in Bath?" she demanded.

"I arrived last Tuesday week."

Lady Lavinia started up.

"Last Tuesday week? Then you have been here ten days and not visited me
until now!"

He appeared to be examining the whiteness of his hands through the folds
of black lace that drooped over them.

"I believe I had other things to do," he said coolly.

A book of sermons that she had been trying to peruse slid to the ground
as Lavinia jerked a cushion into place.

"And you come to me when it suits you? How could you be so unkind as to
refuse my invitation?"

There was a rising, querulous note in her voice which gave warning of
anger.

"My dear Lavinia, if you exhibit your deplorable temper to me, I shall
leave you, so have a care. I thought you would understand that your good
husband's society, improving though it may be, would be altogether too
oppressive for my taste. In fact, I was surprised at your letter."

"You might have come for my sake," she answered peevishly, sinking back
again. "I suppose you have been dancing attendance on the Molesly woman?
Lud! but I think you men have gone crazed."

Understanding came to his Grace, and he smiled provokingly.

"Is that what upsets you? I wondered."

"No, 'tis not!" she flashed. "And I do not see why you should think so!
For my part, I cannot see that she is even tolerable, and the way the
men rave about her is disgusting! Disgusting! But 'tis always the same
when a woman is unattached and wealthy. Well! Well! Why do you not say
something? Do you find her so lovely?"

"To tell the truth, my dear, I have barely set eyes on the lady. I have
been otherwise engaged, and I have done with all women, for the time,
save one."

"So I have heard you say before. Do you contemplate marriage? Lud! but I
pity the girl." She gave a jeering little laugh, but it was evident that
she was interested.

His Grace was not in the least degree ruffled.

"I do not contemplate marriage, Lavinia, so your sympathies are wasted.
I have met a girl--a mere child, for sure--and I will not rest until I
have her."

"Lord! Another farmer's chit?"

"No, my dear sister, not another farmer's chit. A lady."

"God help her! Who is she? Where does she live?"

"She lives in Sussex. Her name I shall not tell you."

Her ladyship kicked an offending cushion on to the floor, and snapped at
him.

"Oh, as you please! I shall not die of curiosity!"

"Ah!" The cynical lips curled annoyingly, and Lady Lavinia was seized
with a mad desire to hurl her smelling-bottle at him. But she knew that
it was worse than useless to be angry with Tracy, so she yawned
ostentatiously, and hoped that she irritated him. If she did, she got no
satisfaction from it, for he continued, quite imperturbably:

"She is the daintiest piece ever a man saw, and I'll swear there's blood
and fire beneath the ice!"

"Is it possible the girl will have none of your Grace?" wondered Lavinia
in mock amazement, and had the pleasure of seeing him frown.

The thin brows met over his arched nose, and the eyes glinted a little,
while she caught a glimpse of cruel white teeth closing on a sensual
under-lip. She watched his hand clench on his snuff-box, and exulted
silently at having roused him. It was a very brief joy, however, for the
next moment the frown had disappeared, the hand unclenched, and he was
smiling again.

"At present she is cold," he admitted, "but I hope that in time she will
become more plastic. I think, Lavinia, I have some experience with your
charming, if capricious sex."

"I don't doubt you have. Where did you meet this perverse beauty?"

"In the Pump Room."

"Lud! Pray, describe her."

"I shall be delighted. She is taller than yourself, and dark. Her hair
is like a dusky cloud of black, and it ripples off her brow and over her
little ears in a most damnably alluring fashion. Her eyes are brown, but
there are lights in them that are purest amber, and yet they are dark
and velvety--"

My lady had recourse to the smelling-bottle.

"But I perceive I weary you. A man in love, my dear Lavinia--"

She was up again at that.

"In love? You? Nonsense! Nonsense! Nonsense! You do not know what the
word means. You are like a--like a fish, with no more of love in you
than a fish, and no more heart than a fish, and--"

"Spare me the rest, I beg. I am very clammy, I make no doubt, but you
will at least accord me more brain than a fish?"

"Oh, you have brain enough!" she raged. "Brain for evil! I grant you
that!"

"It is really very kind of you--"

"The passion you feel now is not _love_. It is--it is--"

"Your pardon, my dear, but at the present moment I am singularly devoid
of all strenuous emotions, so your remark is--"

"Oh, Tracy, Tracy, I am even quarrelling with you!" she cried
wretchedly. "Oh, why?--why?"

"You are entirely mistaken, my dear. This is but the interchange of
compliments. Pray, do not let me hinder you in the contribution of your
share!"

Her lip trembled.

"Go on, Tracy, go on."

"Very well. I had described her eyes, I think?"

"Very tediously."

"I will strive to be brief. Her lips are the most kissable that I have
ever seen--"

"And, as you remarked, you have experience," she murmured. He bowed
ironically.

"Altogether she's as spirited a filly as you could wish for. All she
needs is bringing to heel."

"Does one bring a filly to heel? I rather thought--"

"As usual, my dear Lavinia, you are right: one does not. One breaks in a
filly. I beg leave to thank you for correcting my mixed metaphor."

"Oh, pray do not mention it."

"I will cease to do so. She needs breaking in. It should be amusing to
tame her."

"Should it?" She looked curiously at him.

"Vastly. And I am persuaded it can be done. I will have her."

"But what if she'll none of you?"

Suddenly the heavy lids were raised.

"She will have no choice."

Lady Lavinia shivered and sat up.

"La, Tracy! Will you have no sense of decency?" she cried. "I suppose,"
she sneered, "you think to kidnap the girl?"

"Exactly," he nodded.

She gasped at the effrontery of it.

"Heavens, are you mad? Kidnap a lady! This is no peasant girl, remember.
Tracy, Tracy, pray do not be foolish! How _can_ you kidnap her?"

"That, my dear, is a point which I have not yet decided. But I do not
anticipate much trouble."

"But goodness gracious me! has the child no protectors? No brothers? No
father?"

"There is a father," said Tracy slowly. "He was here at the beginning of
their stay. He does not signify, and, which is important, he is of those
that truckle. Were _I_ to make myself known to him, I believe I might
marry the girl within an hour. But I do not want that. At least--not
yet."

"Good God, Tracy! do you think you are living in the Dark Ages? One
cannot do these things now, I tell you! Will you not at least remember
that you represent our house? 'Twill be a pretty thing an there is a
scandal!" She broke off hopelessly and watched him flick a remnant of
snuff from his cravat.

"Oh, Tracy! 'Tis indeed a dangerous game you play. Pray consider!"

"Really, Lavinia, you are most entertaining. I trust I am capable of
caring for myself and mine own honour."

"Oh, don't sneer--don't sneer!" she cried. "Sometimes I think I quite
hate you!"

"You would be the more amusing, my dear."

She swept the back of her hand across her eyes in a characteristic
movement.

"How cross I am!" she said, and laughed waveringly. "You must bear with
me, Tracy. Indeed, I am not well."

"You should take the waters," he repeated.

"Oh, I do!--I do! And that reminds me that I must look for your beauty."

"She is not like to be there," he answered. "'Tis only very seldom that
she appears."

"What! Is she then _religieuse_?"

"_Religieuse_! Why, in heaven's name?"

"But not to walk in the Rooms--!"

"She is staying here with her aunt, who has been ill. They do not mix
much in society."

"How very dreadful! Yet she used to walk in the Rooms, for you met her
there?"

"Yes," he admitted coolly. "'Tis for that reason that she now avoids
them."

"Oh, Tracy, the poor child!" exclaimed his sister in a sudden fit of
pity. "How can you persecute her, if she dislikes you?"

"She does not."

"Not! Then--"

"Rather, she fears me. But she is intrigued, for all that. I persecute
her, as you call it, for her own (and my) ultimate good. But they quit
Bath in a few days, and then, _nous verrons_!" He rose. "What of Honest
Dick?"

"Don't call him by that odious name! I will not have it!"

"Odious, my dear? Odious? You would have reason an I called him
_Dis_honest Dick."

"Don't! Don't!" she cried, covering her ears. His Grace laughed softly.

"Oh, Lavinia, you must get the better of these megrims of yours, for
there is nought that sickens a man sooner, believe me."

"Oh, go away!--go away!" she implored. "You tease me and tease me until
I cannot bear it, and indeed I do not _mean_ to be shrewish! Please go!"

"I am on the point of doing so, my dear. I trust you will have in a
measure recovered when next I see you. Pray bear my respects to Hon--to
the Honourable Richard."

She stretched out her hand.

"Come again soon!" she begged. "I shall be better to-morrow! 'Tis only
to-day that my head aches till I could shriek with the worry and the
pain of it! Come again!"

"Unfortunately I anticipate leaving Bath within a day or two. But
nothing would have given me greater pleasure than to comply with your
wishes." He kissed her hand punctiliously, and took his leave. At the
door he paused, and looked back mockingly. "By the way--her name
is--Diana." He bowed again and swept out, as Lavinia buried her face in
the cushions and burst into tears.

It was thus that Richard found her, twenty minutes later, and his
concern was so great that it in part restored her spirits, and she spent
a quiet and, for him, blissful evening, playing at piquet.

In the middle of a game she suddenly flung down her hand and caught at
his wrist.

"Dicky, Dicky--I will go home!"

"Go home? What do you mean? Not--"

"Yes, yes--Wyncham! Why not?"

"My dear, do you mean it?" His voice quivered with joyful surprise, and
the cards slipped from his hands.

"Yes, I mean it! But take me quickly before I change my mind! I can
sleep at Wyncham, and here I lie awake all night, and my head aches.
Take me home and I will try to be a better wife! Oh, Dicky, have I been
tiresome and exacting? I did not mean to be! Why do you let me?" She
came quickly round the table and knelt at his side, giving no heed to
the crumpling of her billowing silks. "I have been a wicked, selfish
woman!" she said vehemently. "But indeed I will be better. You must not
_let_ me be bad--you _must_ not, I tell you!"

He flung his arm about her plump shoulders and drew her tightly to him.

"When I get you home at Wyncham, I promise you I will finely hector you,
sweetheart," he said, laughing to conceal his deeper feelings. "I shall
make you into a capital housewife!"

"And I will learn to make butter," she nodded. "Then I must wear a
dimity gown with a muslin apron and cap. Oh, yes, yes-a dimity gown!"
She sprang up and danced to the middle of the room. "Shall I not be
charming, Richard?"

"Very charming, Lavinia!"

"Of course! Oh, we will go home at once--at once! But first I must
procure some new gowns from Marguerite!"

"To make butter in, dear?" he protested.

She was not attending.

"A dimity gown--or shall it be of tiffany with a quilted petticoat? Or
both?" she chanted. "Dicky, I shall set a fashion in country toilettes!"

Dicky sighed.