MY LORD RIDES TO FRUSTRATE HIS GRACE


My lord yawned most prodigiously and let fall the _Spectator._ His eyes
roved towards the clock, and noted with disgust that the hands pointed
to half after five. He sighed and picked up the _Rambler_.

His host and hostess were visiting some miles distant, and were not
likely to be back until late, so my lord had a long dull evening in
front of him, which he relished not at all. Lady O'Hara had tried to
induce him to accompany them, promising that he would meet no one he
knew, but he had for once been prudent and refused steadfastly. So my
lady, after pouting crossly at him and assuring him that he was by far
the most obstinate and disagreeable man that she had ever come across,
not excepting her husband, who, to be sure, had been quite prodigiously
annoying all day, relented, told him she understood perfectly, and even
offered to kiss him to make up for her monstrous ill-humour. Jack
accepted the offer promptly, waved farewell to her from the porch, and
returned to the empty drawing-room to while away the time with two
numbers of the _Spectator_ and his own thoughts till dinner, which was
to be later than usual to-day, on account of an attack of vapours which
had seized the cook.

His thoughts were too unpleasant to be dwelt on; everything in his world
seemed to have gone awry. So he occupied himself with what seemed to him
a particularly uninteresting number of the _Spectator_. The sun had
almost disappeared, and very soon it became too dark to read; no candles
having been brought as yet, my lord, very unromantically, went to sleep
in his chair. Whether he would have eventually snored is not known, for
not more than a quarter of an hour afterwards the butler roused him with
the magic words:

"Dinner is served, sir."

Carstares turned his head lazily.

"What's that you say, James?"

"Dinner is served, sir," repeated the man, and held the door wide for
him to pass out.

"Faith! I'm glad to hear it!"

My lord rose leisurely and pulled his cravat more precisely into
position. Although he was to be alone, he gave his costume a touch here
and there, and flicked a speck of dust from one great cuff with his
elegant lace handkerchief.

He strolled across the old panelled hall to the dining-room, and sat
down at the table.

The curtains were drawn across the windows, and clusters of candles in
graceful silver holders were arranged on the table, shedding a warm
light on to the white damask and the shining covers. The footmen
presented a fish, and my lord permitted a little to be put on his plate.
The butler desired to know if Mr. Carr would drink claret or burgundy,
or ale? Mr. Carr would drink claret. A sirloin of beef next made its
appearance, and went away considerably smaller. Then before my lord was
spread an array of dishes. Partridges flanked one end, a pasty stood
next, a cream, two chickens, a duck, and a ham of noble proportions.

My lord went gently through.

The butler desired to know if Mr. Carr would drink a glass of burgundy?
He exhibited a dusty bottle. My lord considered it through his eyeglass
and decided in favour. He sipped reflectively and waved the ham away.

Sweetmeats appeared before him and a soup, while plump pigeons were
uncovered at his elbow.

One was whipped deftly on to his plate, and as he took up his knife and
fork to carve it, a great scuffling sounded without, angry voices being
raised in expostulation, and, above all, a breathless, insistent appeal
for Mr. Carr or Sir Miles. My lord laid down the knife and fork and came
to his feet.

"It appears I am demanded," he said, and went to the door. It was opened
for him at once, and he stepped out into the hall to find Mr. Beauleigh
trying to dodge the younger footman, who was refusing to let him pass.
At the sight of Carstares he stepped back respectfully. Mr. Beauleigh,
hot, distraught, breathless, fell upon my lord.

"Thank God you are here, sir!" he cried.

Carstares observed him with some surprise. Mr. Beauleigh had been so
very frigid when last they had met.

"I am glad to be at your service, sir," he bowed. "You have commands for
me?"

"We are in terrible trouble," almost moaned the other. "Betty bade me
come to find you, or failing you, Sir Miles, for none other can help
us!"

Carstares' glance grew sharper.

"Trouble? Not--But I forget my manners--we shall talk more at ease in
here." He led Mr. Beauleigh into the morning-room. Beauleigh thrust a
paper into his hands.

"Diana went riding this afternoon, and only her horse returned--with
this attached to the pommel! Read it, sir! Read it!"

"Diana!" Carstares strode over to the light, and devoured the contents
of the single sheet, with eager eyes.

They were not long, and they were very much to the point:

"Mr. Beauleigh may haply recall to mind a certain 'Mr. Everard,' of
Bath, whose Addresses to Miss Beauleigh were cruelly repulsed. He
regrets having now to take the Matter into his Own Hands, and trusts to
further his Acquaintance with Mr. Beauleigh at some Future Date, when
Miss Beauleigh shall, He trusts, have become 'Mrs. Everard.'"

Jack crumpled the paper furiously in his hand, grinding out a startling
oath.

"--insolent cur!"

"Yes, yes, sir! But what will that avail my daughter? I have come
straight to you, for my sister is convinced you know this Everard, and
can tell me where to seek them!"

Carstares clapped a hand on his shoulder.

"Never fear, Mr. Beauleigh! I pledge you my word she shall be found this
very night!"

"You know where he has taken her? You do? You are sure?"

"Back to his earth, I'll lay my life; 'tis ever his custom." He strode
to the door, flung it wide and shot clear, crisp directions at the
footman. "See to it that my mare is saddled in ten minutes and Blue
Devil harnessed to your master's curricle! Don't stand staring--go! And
send Salter to me!"

The footman scuttled away, pausing only to inform my lord that Salter
was not in.

Carstares remembered that he had given Jim leave to visit his Mary at
Fittering, and crushed out another oath. He sprang up the stairs, Mr.
Beauleigh following breathlessly.

In his room, struggling with his boots, he put a few questions.

Mr. Beauleigh related the whole tale, dwelling mournfully on the
excellent references for Harper he had received from Sir Hugh Grandison.

Jack hauled at his second boot.

"Tracy himself, of course!" he fumed, adjusting his spurs.

"Pray, Mr. Carr, who is this scoundrel? Is it true that you know him?"

"Andover," answered Jack from the depths of the garde-robe. "Damn the
fellow, where has he put my cloak?" This to the absent Jim, and not the
Duke.

"Andover! Not--surely not the Duke?" cried Mr. Beauleigh.

"I know of none other. At last!"

He emerged and tossed a heavy, many-caped coat on to the bed.

"Now, sir, your attention for one moment."

He was buckling on his sword as he spoke, and not looking at the other
man.

"Tracy will have borne Di--Miss Beauleigh off to Andover Court, seven
miles beyond Wyncham, to the south-west. Your horse, I take it, is not
fresh," (he knew Mr. Beauleigh's horse). "I have ordered the curricle
for you. I will ride on at once by short cuts, for there is not a moment
to be lost--"

"The Duke of Andover!" interrupted Mr. Beauleigh. "The Duke of Andover!
Why, do you think he purposes to marry my daughter?"

Jack gave a short, furious laugh.

"Ay! As he married all the others!"

Mr. Beauleigh winced.

"Sir! Pray why should you say so?"

"I perceive you do not know his Grace. Perchance you have heard of Devil
Belmanoir?"

Then the little man paled.

"Good God, Mr. Carr, 'tis not he?"

Carstares caught up his hat and whip.

"Ay, Mr. Beauleigh, 'tis indeed he. Now perhaps you appreciate the
necessity for haste?"

Mr. Beauleigh's eyes were open at last.

"For God's sake, Mr. Carr, after them!"

"'Tis what I intend, sir. You will follow as swiftly as possible?"

"Yes, yes, but do not wait for anything! Can you reach Andover--in
time?"

"I reach Andover to-night," was the grim answer. "And you, sir? You know
the road?"

"I will find out. Only go, Mr. Carr! Do not waste time, I implore you!"

Jack struggled into his riding coat, clapped his hat on to his head, and
with his Grace of Andover's sword tucked beneath his arm, went down the
stairs three and four at a time, and hurried out on to the drive, where
the groom stood waiting with Jenny's bridle over his arm. Carstares cast
a hasty glance at the girths and sprang up. The mare sidled and
fidgeted, fretting to be gone, but was held in with a hand of iron while
her master spoke to the groom.

"You must drive Mr. Beauleigh to Andover Court as fast as you can. It is
a matter of life and death. You know the way?"

The amazed groom collected his wits with difficulty.

"Roughly, sir."

"That will do--Mr. Beauleigh will know. Drive your damnedest, man--Sir
Miles won't mind. You understand?"

Jack's word was law in the O'Hara household.

"Yes, sir," answered the man, and touched his hat.

On the word, he saw the beautiful straining mare leap forward, and the
next moment both horse and rider were swallowed in the gloom.

"Well I'm--darned," exploded the groom, and turned to fetch the
curricle.

Across the stretch of moorland went Jack at a gallop, Jenny speeding
under him like the wind, and seeming to catch something of her master's
excitement. Low over her neck he bent, holding the Duke's sword across
his saddle-bows with one hand and with the other guiding her. So he
covered some three miles. He reined in then, and forced her to a canter,
saving her strength for the long distance ahead of them. She was in
splendid condition, glorying in the unrestrained gallop across the turf,
and although she was too well-mannered to pull on the rein, Carstares
could see by the eager twitching of her ears how she longed to be gone
over the ground. He spoke soothingly to her and guided her on to the
very lane where Diana had ridden that afternoon. She fell into a long,
easy stride that seemed to eat up the ground. Now they were off the
lane, riding over a field to join another road, leading west. A hedge
cut them off, but the mare gathered her legs beneath her and soared
over, alighting as gracefully as a bird, and skimming on again up the
road.

Her responsive ears flickered as he praised her, and pulled her up.

"Easy now, Jenny, easy!"

She was trembling with excitement, but she yielded to his will and
trotted quietly for perhaps another half-hour.

Carstares rose and fell rhythmically in the saddle, taking care to keep
his spurred heels from her glossy sides. He guessed the time to be about
seven o'clock, and his brows drew together worriedly. Jenny was made of
steel and lightning, but would she manage it? He had never tested her
powers as he was about to now, and he dared not allow her much breathing
space. Every minute was precious if he were to reach Andover before it
was too late.

Assuming that Tracy had captured Diana at four, or thereabouts, he
reckoned that it should take a heavy coach four hours or more to reach
Andover. Jenny might manage it in two and a half hours, allowing for
short cuts, in which case he ought to arrive not long after the others.

He was tortured by the thought of Diana at the mercy of a man of Tracy's
calibre; Diana in terror; Diana despairing. Unconsciously he pressed his
knees against the smooth flank and once more Jenny fell into that long,
swift stride. She seemed to glide over the ground with never a jar nor a
stumble. Carstares was careful not to irk her in any way, only keeping a
guiding, restraining hand on the rein, and for the rest letting her go
as she willed. On and on they sped, as the time lagged by, sometimes
through leafy lanes, at others over fields and rough tracks. Not for
nothing had Carstares roamed this country for two years; almost every
path was familiar to him; he never took a wrong turn, never swerved,
never hesitated. On and on, past sleeping villages and lonely
homesteads, skirting woods, riding up hill and down dale, never
slackening his hold on the rein, never taking his eyes off the road
before him, except now and then to throw a glance to the side on the
look-out for some hidden by-path. After the first hour a dull pain in
his shoulder reminded him of his wound, still troublesome. He set his
teeth and pressed on still faster.

The mare caught her foot on a loose stone and stumbled. His hand held
her together, the muscles standing out like ribbed steel, his voice
encouraged her, and he made her walk again. This time she did not fret
against the restraint. He shifted the sword under his bridle hand, and
passed the right down her steaming neck, crooning to her softly beneath
his breath.

She answered with a low, throbbing whinny. She could not understand why
he desired her to gallop on, braving unknown terrors in the dark; all
she could know was that it was his wish. It seemed also that he was
pleased with her. She would have cantered on again, but he made her walk
for, perhaps, another five minutes, until they were come to a stretch of
common he knew well. It was getting late, and he pressed her with his
knee, adjuring her to do her best, and urging her to a gallop, leaning
right forward, the better to pierce the darkness ahead. A gorse bush
loomed before them, and Jenny shied at it, redoubling her pace.

With hand and voice he soothed her, and on they sped. He judged the time
to be now about half-past eight, and knew that they must make the
remaining miles in an hour. Even now the coach might have arrived, and
beyond that he dared not think.

Another half-hour crept by, and he could feel the mare's breath coming
short and fast, and reined in again, this time to a canter. He was off
the moor now, on a road he remembered well, and knew himself to be not
ten miles from Wyncham. Five more miles as the crow flies.... He knew
he must give Jenny another rest, and pulled up, dismounting and going to
her head.

Her legs were trembling, and the sweat rolled off her satin skin. She
dropped her nose into his hand, sobbingly. He rubbed her ears and patted
her, and she lipped his cheek lovingly, breathing more easily.

Up again then, and forward once more, skimming over the ground.

Leaving Wyncham on his right, Carstares cut west and then north-west, on
the highroad now, leading to Andover. Only two more miles to go....

Jenny stumbled again and broke into a walk. Her master tapped her
shoulder, and she picked up her stride again.

She was almost winded, and he knew it, but he had to force her onwards.
She responded gallantly to his hand, although her breath came sobbingly
and her great, soft eyes were blurred.

At last the great iron gates were in view; he could see them through the
dusk, firmly shut. He pulled up and walked on, looking for a place in
the hedge where Jenny might push through.