RICHARD PLAYS THE MAN


Lady Lavinia's frame of mind when she awoke next morning was hardly
befitting one who contemplated an elopement. A weight seemed to rest on
her chest, hopeless misery was gathered about her head. She could not
bring herself to drink her chocolate, and, feeling that inaction was the
worst of all, she very soon crawled out of bed and allowed her maid to
dress her. Then she went with dragging steps to her boudoir, wondering
all the time where Richard was and what he was doing. She seated herself
at her window and looked out on to the square, biting the edge of her
handkerchief in the effort to keep back her tears.

Richard was in a no more cheerful mood. He, too, left his chocolate
untouched, and went presently down to the breakfast table and looked at
the red sirloin with a feeling of acute nausea. He managed to drink a
cup of coffee, and immediately afterwards left the room and made his way
to his wife's boudoir. He told himself he was acting weakly, and had far
better avoid her, but in the end he gave way to his longing to see her,
and knocked on one white panel.

Lavinia's heart leapt. How well she knew that knock!

"Come in!" she called, and tried to compose her features.

Richard entered and shut the door behind him.

"Oh--oh--good-morning!" she smiled. "You--wanted to speak with
me--Dick?"

"I--yes--that is--er--have you the Carlyles' invitation?"

It was, perhaps, an unlucky excuse. Lavinia turned away and fought
against her tears.

"I--I believe--'tis in my--escritoire," she managed to say. "I--I will
look for it."

She rose and unlocked the bureau, standing with her back to him.

"'Tis no matter," stammered Carstares. "I--only--'twas but that I could
not find it. Pray do not disturb yourself!"

"Oh--not--at all," she answered, scattering a handful of letters before
her. "Yes--here 'tis." She came up to him with the note in her hand,
extending it.

Carstares looked down at the golden head, and at the little face with
its eyes cast down, and red mouth set so wistfully. Heavens, how could
he bear to live without her! Mechanically he took the letter.

Lavinia turned away, and as she stepped from him something snapped in
Richard's brain. The luckless invitation was flung down.

"No, by God you shall not!" he cried suddenly.

Lavinia stopped, trembling.

"Oh--oh, what do you mean?" she fluttered.

The mists were gone from his mind now, everything was clear. Lavinia
should not elope with Lovelace. In two strides he was at her side, had
caught her by the shoulders and swung her to face him.

"You shall not leave me! Do you understand? I cannot live without you!"

Lavinia gave a little cry full of relief, joy and wonderment, and shrank
against him.

"Oh, please, please forgive me and keep me with you!" she cried, and
clung to the lapels of his coat.

Carstares swept her right off the ground in the violence of his embrace,
but she did not mind, although the crushing was ruinous to her silks.
Silks were no longer uppermost in her brain. She returned his kisses
eagerly, sobbing a little.

When Carstares was able to say anything beyond how he loved her, he
demanded if she did not love him?

"Of course I do!" she cooed. "I always, always did, only I was so
selfish and so careless!"

He carried her to the sofa and sat down with her on his knee, trying to
look into her face. But she had somehow contrived to hide it on his
shoulder, and he did not succeed.

"Then you never loved that puppy?" he asked, amazed.

One hand crept up to his other shoulder.

"Oh, Dicky, no! And--and you--you don't love that horrid Mrs. Fanshawe,
do you?"

He was still more amazed.

"Mrs. Fanshawe? Great heavens, no! You never thought that, surely?"

"I did--I did! Since you were always at her house, and so cold to
me--how could I help it?"

"Cold to _you_? My dearest, surely not?"

"You were--you truly were--and I was so miserable--I--I thought I had
been so unreasonable and so horrid that you had ceased to I-love me--and
I did not know what to do. And--and then you told me that you were going
to--to confess--and I lost my temper and said I would n-not stay with
you--But I never, never meant it--and when you seemed to expect me to
go--I--I did not know what to do again!"

He patted her shoulder comfortingly.

"Sweetheart, don't cry! I had no idea of all this--why, I was sure that
you loved Lovelace--I never doubted it--why in the world did you not
tell me the truth?"

She sat up at that, and looked at him.

"Why, how could I?" she demanded. "I was quite certain that you loved
Isabella Fanshawe. I felt I had to go away, and I could not do it
alone--so--so--so, of course I had to elope. And I told Harold last
night that I would go with him--and I'm afraid he didn't quite want me
when he heard that I loved you. Oh, Dicky darling, you'll tell him that
I won't go with him, won't you?"

He could not help laughing.

"Ay, I'll tell him. 'Pon rep., sweetheart, I can find it in me to be
sorry for him!"

"Oh, he will not mind for long," she said philosophically. "He loves so
_easily_, you see! But you, Dick--why did you go so often--so _very_
often to see Mrs. Fanshawe?"

His face grew solemn.

"She knew--Jack--in Vienna--I--I wanted to hear all she could tell me of
him--I could think of nothing else."

"Oh, Dicky! How--how wickedly foolish I have been! And 'twas that that
made you so cold--and I thought--oh, dear!"

He drew her head down on to his shoulder again.

"My poor love! Why, 'tis the kindest lady imaginable, but as to loving
her--!" He kissed her hand lingeringly. "I love--and have always
loved--a far different being: a naughty, wilful, captivating little
person, who--"

Lady Lavinia clasped her arms about his neck.

"You make me feel so very, very dreadful! I have indeed been
naughty--I--"

"And you'll be so many times again," he told her, laughing.

"No, no! I--will--try to be good!"

"I do not want you good!" Richard assured her. "I want you to be your
own dear self!" ... Lady Lavinia disengaged herself with a contented
little sigh, and stood up.

"How charming it is to be happy again, to be sure!" she remarked
naively. "To think that only half an hour ago I was wishing to be dead!"
She went over to the glass and straightened her hair.

Richard looked at her rather anxiously.

"Lavinia--you--you quite understand, I am going to tell everyone the
truth--next Friday?" he asked.

"Yes, I do, of course--'tis dreadfully disagreeable of you, but I
suppose you will do it. I do _hope_ people will not refuse to recognise
us, though."

"No one would ever refuse to recognise you, dearest."

She brightened.

"Do you really think so? Well, perhaps after all, 'twill not be so
_very_ horrid. And--and you will like to have Jack again, won't you?
Yes--I knew you would. Oh, 'twill all be quite comfortable after a
little while, I make no doubt!"

       *       *       *       *       *

His Grace of Andover arose betimes, and early sallied forth into the
street. He called a chair, and drove to an address in the Strand, where
lodged a certain Colonel Shepherd. Half-an-hour did he spend with the
Colonel, and when he at length emerged from the house the curl of his
lip betokened satisfaction. He did not at once hail a chair, but walked
along in the direction of St. James's, entering the park in company
with one Dare, who, seven years before, had given a certain memorable
card-party.

Dare was pleasantly intrigued over Richard's latest oddity.

"Have you an idea what 'tis about, Belmanoir?" he inquired. "Has he
written you to come as well?"

"I believe I did receive some communication from Carstares; yes--I
remember, Andrew brought it."

"Well, what does it mean? Fortescue is bidden, and Davenant. 'Tis very
curious."

"My dear Dare, I am not in Richard's confidence. We shall doubtless hear
all that there is to hear at the given time. Mysteries do not interest
me. But 'twill be a pleasant reunion.... Fortescue and Davenant, you
say? Strange! I have heard that Evans and Milward have also received
their sum--invitations. It should be most entertaining."

"'Tis prodigious curious," repeated Dare. "No one can imagine what 'tis
all about!"

"Ah?" His Grace's thin lips twitched.

Midway through the afternoon he repaired to Wyncham House and was
ushered into the library.

Richard sat writing, but rose on seeing him, and came forward.

It struck his Grace that Carstares was looking quite happy.

"You seem cheerful, Richard!"

"I am," smiled his brother-in-law.

"I am much relieved to hear it. I have seen Shepherd."

"Shepherd?" interrogated Carstares.

"Lovelace's colonel, my dear Richard. You may count on Captain Harold's
departure--on an important mission--in, say, forty-eight hours."

"You may count on Captain Harold's departure in very much less, Tracy,"
said Carstares, a twinkle in his eye.

The Duke started forward.

"She has gone?" he almost hissed.

"Gone? No! She is in the drawing-room with him."

"With Lovelace! And you permit it? You stand by and watch another man--"

"Say farewell to my wife. But I am not watching it, as you see."

The anger died out of his Grace's eyes.

"Farewell? Do you tell me you at last came to your senses?"

"We found that we both laboured under a delusion," replied Carstares
pleasantly.

"I am delighted to hear you say so. I hope you will for the future keep
a stricter hold over Lavinia."

"Do you?"

"I do. I think I will not undo what I have done; Lovelace were perhaps
better out of the way for a time."

"Why, I have no objection to that," bowed Richard.

His Grace nodded shortly and picked up his hat.

"Then there remains nothing more to be done in the matter."

He looked piercingly across at Carstares. "She did not love him?"

Richard gave a happy little sigh.

"She loves me."

The heavy lids drooped again.

"You cannot conceive my delight. If she indeed loves you, she is safe. I
thought she had not got it in her. Pray bear my respects to her." His
hand was on the door-knob, when something seemed to occur to him.

"I take it my presence at Wyncham on Friday will not be necessary?" he
said cynically.

Richard flushed.

"It will not be necessary."

"Then I am sure you will excuse me an I do not appear. I have other,
more important affairs on hand.....But I shall be loth to miss the
heroics," he added pensively, and chuckled. "_Au revoir,_ my good
Richard!"

Richard bowed him out thankfully.

Presently the front door opened and shut again, and looking out of the
window he saw that Captain Harold Lovelace had taken his departure.

He was now awaiting Mr. Warburton, whom he had sent in search of John
some days ago. He should have been here by now, he thought, but perhaps
he had been detained. Richard was aching to hear news of his brother,
longing to see him once more. But at the same time he was dreading the
meeting; he shrank from the thought of looking into Jack's eyes,
cold--even scornful. It was not possible, so he reasoned, that Jack
should feel no resentment....

"Mr. Warburton, sir."

Carstares turned and came eagerly forward to greet the newcomer.

"Well? Well?"

Mr. Warburton spread out deprecating hands.

"Alas! Mr. Carstares."

Richard caught his arm.

"What mean you? He is not--dead?"

"I do not know, sir."

"You could not find him? Quick! Tell me?"

"Alas! no, sir."

"But the Chequers--he said--Surely they knew something?"

"Nought, Mr. Carstares." Out came Mr. Warburton's snuff-box. Very
deliberately he took a pinch, shaking the remains from his finger-tips.
"The host, Chadber--an honest man, though lacking in humour--has not set
eyes on my lord for well-nigh six months. Not since I went to advise my
lord of the Earl's death."

"But Warburton, he cannot be far? He is not dead! Oh, surely not that?"

"No, no, Master Dick," soothed the lawyer. "We should have heard of it
had he been killed. I fear he has gone abroad once more. It seems he
often spoke of travelling again."

"Abroad? God! don't let me lose him again!" He sank into a chair, his
head in his arms.

"Tut! I implore you, Mr. Carstares! Do not despair yet. We have no proof
that he has left the country. I daresay we shall find him almost at
once. Chadber thinks it likely he will visit the inn again ere long.
Calm yourself, Master Dick!" He walked up to the man and laid a hand on
one heaving shoulder. "We shall find him, never fear! But do not--I know
'twould grieve him to see you so upset, Master Dick--pray, do not--!"

"If I could only make amends!" groaned Richard.

"Well, sir, are you not about to? He would not wish you to distress
yourself like this! He was so fond of you! Pray, pray do not!"

Carstares rose unsteadily and walked to the window. "I crave your
pardon, Mr. Warburton--you must excuse me--I have been--living in
hell--this last week."

Warburton came over to his side.

"Master Dick--I--you know I have never cared for you-as--well--as--"

"You cared for him."

"Er--yes, sir, exactly!--and of late years I may, perhaps, have been
hard. I would desire to--er--apologise for any unjust--er--thoughts I
may have harboured against you. I--I--possibly, I never quite
understood. That is all, sir."

He blew his nose rather violently, and then his hand found Richard's.

       *       *       *       *       *

Richard Carstares had plenty to occupy him for the rest of the week.
Arrangements had to be made, a house acquired for Lavinia, Wyncham House
to be thoroughly cleaned and put in order, awaiting its rightful owner.
Once she had made up her mind to face the inevitable, Lavinia quite
enjoyed all the preparations. The new house in Great Jermyn Street she
voted charming, and she straightway set to work to buy very expensive
furniture for it, and to superintend all the alterations. In her present
penitent mood she would even have accompanied her husband to Wyncham on
Monday, to stand by him on the fateful Friday; but this he would not
allow, insisting that she remain in town until his return. So she
fluttered contentedly from Grosvenor Square to Jermyn Street, very busy
and quite happy.

Carstares was to travel to Wyncham on Monday, arriving there the
following evening in company with Andrew, whom he was taking as far as
Andover. His lordship had lately embroiled himself in a quarrel over a
lady when deep in his cups, and owing to the subsequent duel at Barn
Elms and the almost overpowering nature of his debts, he deemed it
prudent to go into seclusion for a spell. Tracy disappeared from town in
the middle of the week, whither no one knew, but it was universally
believed that he had gone to Scotland on a visit.

Monday at length dawned fair and promising. After bidding his wife a
very tender farewell, and gently drying her wet eyelashes with his own
handkerchief, Richard set out with his brother-in-law in the big
travelling chaise soon after noon. Andrew had quite recovered his
hitherto rather dampened spirits, and produced a dice-box from one
pocket and a pack of cards from the other wherewith to beguile the
tedium of the journey.