MY LORD DICTATES A LETTER AND RECEIVES A VISITOR


My lord came sighing back to life. He opened his eyes wearily, and
turned his head. A faint feeling of surprise stole over him. He was in a
room he had never been in before, and by the window, busy with some
needlework, sat a little old lady who was somehow vaguely familiar.

"Who--are--you?" he asked, and was annoyed to find his voice so weak.

The little lady jumped, and came across to him.

"Praise be to God!" she ejaculated. "Likewise, bless the boy! The fever
is passed." She laid a thin hand on his brow, and smiled down into his
wondering eyes.

"As cool as a cucumber, dear boy. What a mercy!"

It was a long time since anyone had called Jack dear, or boy. He
returned the smile feebly and closed his eyes.

"I--do not--understand--anything," he murmured drowsily.

"Never trouble your head then. Just go to sleep."

He considered this gravely for a moment. It seemed sensible enough, and
he was so very, very tired. He shut his eyes with a little sigh.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he awoke again it was morning of the next day, and the sun streamed
in the window, making him blink.

Someone rustled forward, and he saw it was the lady who had called him
dear and bidden him go to sleep.

He smiled, and a very thin hand came out of the bedclothes.

"But who are you?" he demanded a little querulously.

Miss Betty patted his hand gently.

"Still worrying your poor head over that? I am Di's Aunt Betty--though,
to be sure, you don't know who Di is!"

Remembrance was coming back to my lord.

"Why--why--you are the lady in the coach!--Tracy--I remember!"

"Well, I know nought of Tracy, but I'm the lady in the coach."

"And the other--"

"That was Diana Beauleigh, my niece--the pet. You will see her when you
are better."

"But--but--where am I, madam?"

"Now don't get excited, dear boy!"

"I'm thirty!" protested Jack with a wicked twinkle.

"I should not have thought it, but thirty's a boy to me, in any case!"
retorted Miss Betty, making him laugh. "You are in Mr. Beauleigh's
house--Di's father, and my brother. And here you will stay until you are
quite recovered!"

Jack raised himself on his elbow, grimacing at the pain the movement
caused him.

"Egad, madam! have I been here long?" he demanded.

Very firmly was he pushed back on to his pillows.

"Will you be still? A nice thing 'twould be if you were to aggravate
that wound of yours! You will have been here a week to-morrow. Bless my
heart, what ails the boy?" For Jack's face took on an expression of
incredulous horror.

"A _week_, madam? Never say so!"

"'Tis as true as I stand here. And a nice fright you have given us, what
with nearly dying, and raving about your Dicks and your Jims!"

My lord glanced up sharply.

"Oh! So I--talked?"

"Talk? Well, yes, if you can call all that mixture of foreign jargon
talking. Now you must be still and wait till the doctor comes again."

For a while Carstares lay in silence. He thought of Jim and smiled a
little. "I could not have thought of a better punishment had I tried,"
he told himself, and then frowned. "Poor fellow! He'll be off his head
with fright over me. Miss--er--Betty?"

"Well, and are you not asleep yet?"

"Asleep, Madam? Certainly not!" he said with dignity. "I must write a
letter."

"'Deed, an' you shall not!"

"But I must! 'Tis monstrous important, madam."

She shook her head resolutely.

"Not until Mr. Jameson gives permission," she said firmly.

Jack struggled up, biting his lip.

"Then I shall get up!" he threatened.

In an instant she was by his side.

"No, no! Now lie down and be good!"

"I will not lie down and be good!"

"Then I shan't let you touch a pen for weeks!"

Jack became very masterful and frowned direfully upon her.

"Madam, I insist on being allowed to write that letter!"

"Sir, I insist on your lying down!"

He controlled a twitching lip.

"Woe betide you unless you bring me pen and paper, Miss Betty!"

"But, dear boy, reflect! You could not use your arm."

"I will use it!" replied Jack indomitably, but he sank back on to the
pillows with his eyes closed and a tiny furrow of pain between his
straight brows.

"I told you so!" scolded Miss Betty, not without a note of triumph in
her voice, and proceeded to rearrange the disorderly coverlet.

The blue eyes opened wide, pleadingly.

"Madam, indeed 'tis very important."

She could not withstand that look.

"Well," she compromised, "I'll not let you write yourself, that's
certain--but could you not dictate to me?"

Jack brightened, and caught her hand to his lips.

"Miss Betty, you are an angel!" he told her.

"Ah now, get along with you!" She hurried away to fetch paper and ink.

When she returned she found him plucking impatiently at the sheet, and
frowning.

"I am ready," she said.

"Thank you, madam. 'Tis very kind in you--"

"Nonsense!"

He laughed weakly.

"I want you to write to my servant, to bid him bring my baggage to the
nearest inn--"

"That will I not! I shall tell him to bring it here."

"But, Miss Betty, I cannot possibly trespass upon--"

"Will you have done? Trespass indeed!"

"I perceive I shall be much put upon," sighed Jack, and watched her
lightning smile.

"You BOY! Will you dictate?"

"Very well, ma'am. No, I have changed my mind. I'll have it writ to a
friend, please: 'Dear Miles.... True to my promise.... I write to
you.... In case... you should be worried... over my disappearance...
be it known... that I am at'--pray, madam, where am I?"

"Horton Manor, Littledean," she replied, writing it down.

"Thank you. 'I had the misfortune to injure my shoulder in a--"

"'And arm,'" put in the scribe, inexorably.

"'And arm, in a fight... and a certain very... kind lady--'"

"I refuse to write that rubbish! 'One of the ladies whom I rescued--'"

"Good heavens, madam, you've not put that?" cried Jack horrified.

She smiled reassuringly.

"I have not. I have put: 'My nurse is writing this for me.'"

"Madam, you are of a teasing disposition," reproved my lord.
"M--yes--'When you take Jenny--over to Trencham... will you please tell
Jim to bring my baggage... here at once?' Have you that, Miss Betty?"

"Yes."

"Remember me to Lady... Molly, I beg... and accept my apologies...
and thanks.'" He paused. "Will you sign it J.C., please, and address it
to Sir Miles O'Hara, Thurze House, Maltby?"

"Sir Miles O'Hara! Is he your friend, Mr.--Mr.--I do not know your
name."

"Car--" began Jack, and stopped, biting his lip. "Carr," he continued
imperturbably, "John Carr. Do you know O'Hara, Miss Betty?"

"Me? No! Will he come to see you, do you think?"

"If you let him in, madam!"

"Gracious! Well, well! I'll tell Thomas to ride over with this at once."

"Miss Betty, you are marvellously good. I vow I can never thank--"

"Bless the boy! And what about yourself, pray? I shudder to think of
what might have happened to Di if you had not come up! 'Tis we can never
thank you enough."

Jack reddened boyishly and uncomfortably.

"Indeed, you exaggerate--"

"Tut, tut! Well, go to sleep, and never worry about anything till I
return. And you won't try and get up?"

He shook with laughter.

"I swear I will not! Even an you never return, I will lie here, wasting
away--" But he spoke to space, for with a delighted laugh she had left
the room.

It was not until late that afternoon that O'Hara arrived, and he was
conducted, after a brief conversation with Diana and her father, to my
lord's room, where Miss Betty received him with her cheery smile and
jerky curtsey.

"You'll not excite Mr. Carr?" she said, but was interrupted by my lord's
voice from within, weak but very gay.

"Come in, Miles, and never listen to Miss Betty! She is a tyrant and
denies me my wig!"

O'Hara laughed in answer to Miss Betty's quizzical smile, and strode
over to the bed. He gripped my lord's thin hand and frowned down at him
with an assumption of anger.

"Young good-for-nought! Could ye find nought better to do than to smash
yourself up and well-nigh drive your man crazy with fright?"

"Oh, pshaw! Did you find Jim?"

O'Hara looked round and saw that Miss Betty had discreetly vanished. He
sat gingerly down on the edge of the bed.

"Ay. I took the mare over as soon as I had your letter--and a fine scare
you gave me, Jack, I can tell you! She recognised him, and I accosted
him."

"I'll swear you did not get much satisfaction from Jim!" said my lord.
"Did he look very foolish?"

"To tell ye the truth, I thought the man was half daft, and wondered
whether I'd been after making a mistake. But in the end I got him to
believe what I was trying to tell him, and he has taken the mare, and
will bring your baggage along this evening. By the way, John, I told him
of our little meeting, and of your pistols being unloaded. He said 'twas
his fault, and ye never saw aught to touch his face! Put out was not the
word for it."

"I suppose so. Look here, Miles, this is a damned funny affair!"

"What happened to you exactly?"

"'Tis what I am about to tell you. After I had left you, I rode on quite
quietly for about an hour, and then came upon Miss Beauleigh's coach
stopped by three blackguards who were trying to drag her to another
coach belonging to the gentleman who conducted the affair. So, of
course, I dismounted, and went to see what was to be done."

"You _would_ be after poking your nose into what didn't concern ye. Four
men, and ye had the audacity to tackle them all? 'Tis mad ye are
entirely!"

"Of course, if you had been in my place you would have ridden off in
another direction--or aided the scoundrels?" was the scathing reply.

O'Hara chuckled.

"Well, go on, Jack. I'm not saying I don't wish I had been with ye."

"'Twould have been superb. I suppose Miss Beauleigh has told you most of
the tale, but there is one thing that she could not have told you, for
she did not know it: the man I fought with was Belmanoir."

"Thunder and turf! Not the Duke?"

"Yes. Tracy."

"Zounds! Did he know ye?"

"I cannot be certain. I was masked, of course, but he said he thought he
did. 'Twas at that moment he fired his pistol at me."

"The dirty scoundrel!"

"M'm--yes. 'Tis that which makes me think he did not know me. Damn it
all, Miles, even Tracy would not do a thing like that!"

"Would he not? If ye ask me, I say that Tracy is game enough for any
kind of devilry."

"But, my dear fellow, that is too black! He could not try to kill in
cold blood a man he had hunted with, and fenced with-and--and--no man
could!"

O'Hara looked extremely sceptical.

"Because ye could not yourself, is not to say that a miserable spalpeen
like Belmanoir could not."

"I don't believe it of him. We were always quite friendly--if it had
been Robert now--But I am not going to believe it. And don't say
anything to these people, O'Hara, because they do not know Devil. I
gather from what Miss Betty says, that he calls himself Everard. He met
the girl--Diana--at Bath; you know his way. She'd none of him: hence the
abduction."

"Heavens, but 'tis a foul mind the man's got!"

"Where women are concerned, yes. Otherwise--'tis not such a bad fellow,
Miles."

"I've no use for that kind of dirt myself, Jack."

"Oh, I don't know. I daresay we are none of us exactly saints." He
changed the subject abruptly. "How is Jenny?"

"Rather off her feed; missing you, I expect. I left her with your man.
He should be arriving soon, I should think. I don't fancy he'll waste
much time."

"Neither do I. Poor fellow, he must have worried terribly over his
worthless master."

"Sure, his face was as white as your own when I told him ye were
wounded!"

Carstares turned his head quickly.

"What's this about my face? Just be so kind as to hand me that mirror,
Miles."

O'Hara laughed and obeyed, watching my lord's close scrutiny of his
countenance with some surprise.

"Interesting pallor, my dear friend, interesting pallor. Nevertheless, I
am glad that Jim is on his way." He met O'Hara's eyes as he looked up,
and his lips quivered irrepressibly.

"You think me very vain, Miles?"

"Is it a pose of yours, John? Is it Sir Anthony Ferndale, Bart?"

"No. I believe it is myself. You see, when one has but one's self to
live for and think for--one makes the most of one's self! Hence my
vanity. Take the mirror away, please--the sight of my countenance
offends me!"

"Sure, ye are free with your orders, me lord!" said O'Hara, putting the
glass down on the table. "And, while I think of it--what might your name
be now?"

"John Carr--a slip of the tongue on my part, stopped in time. I hear my
mentor returning--and--Miles!"

"Well?"

"Come again!"

"Come again! My dear boy, ye'll be sick of the sight of me soon! I shall
be here every day."

"Thanks! It will take a good deal to sicken me, I think." He bit his
lip, turning his head away as Miss Betty came into the room.

"I'm afraid that you ought to leave my patient now, Sir Miles," she
said. "He has had enough excitement for one day, and should sleep." She
glanced at the averted head inquiringly. "I doubt he is tired?"

Jack turned and smiled at her.

"No, Miss Betty, I'm not. But I know you will refuse to believe me."

"My dear boy, do you know you have black lines beneath your eyes?"

"More remarks about my face!" he sighed, and glanced at O'Hara, who had
risen.

"You are quite right, Miss Beauleigh, I must go. May I come again
to-morrow?"

"Surely," she beamed. "We shall be delighted to welcome you."

O'Hara bent over the bed.

"Then _au revoir_, Jack. My lady sent her love to her 'Cousin
Harry'--the saucy puss!"

"Did she? How prodigious kind of her, Miles! And you'll give her mine,
and kiss her--"

"Yes?" said O'Hara with dangerous calm. "I'll kiss her what?"

"Her hand for me!" ended Carstares, bubbling over. "Good-bye, and thank
you--"

"That will suffice!" said Miles, cutting him short.

He bowed to Miss Betty and left the room.

The business-like little lady fluttered over to the bedside and
rearranged the pillows.

"Well, and are you satisfied?"

"Madam, most extraordinarily so, I thank you. I shall be getting up
soon."

"H'm!" was all she vouchsafed, and left him to his meditations.

As she had foreseen, he dozed a little, but his shoulder would not allow
him to sleep. He lay in a semi-comatose condition, his eyes shut, and a
deep furrow, telling of pain, between his brows.

The sound of a shutting door made him open his eyes; he turned his head
slightly and saw that Jim Salter was standing in the middle of the room
looking at him anxiously.

My lord returned his gaze crossly, and Jim waited for the storm to
break.

Carstares' heart melted, and he managed to smile.

"I'm monstrous glad to see you, Jim," he said.

"You--you can't mean that, sir! 'Twas I left your pistols unloaded."

"I know. Damned careless of you, but it's the sort of thing I should do
myself, after all."

Jim advanced to the bedside.

"Do you mean you forgive me, sir?"

"Why, of course! I could not have fired on my best friend in any case."

"No, sir, but that don't make it any better."

"It doesn't, of course, and I was rather annoyed at the time--Oh, devil
take you, Jim, don't look at me like that! I'm not dead yet!"

"If--if you had been killed, sir--'twould have been my fault."

"Rubbish! I'd a sword, hadn't I? For heaven's sake don't worry about it
any more! Have you brought all my baggage?"

"Yes, sir. It shan't occur again, sir."

"Certainly not. Jenny is well?"

"Splendid, sir. Will you still trust me with your pistols, sir?"

Carstares groaned.

"Will you have done? 'Twas an accident, and I have forgotten it. Here's
my hand on it!" He grasped Jim's as he spoke, and seemed to brush the
whole subject aside.

"Have you disposed of that horrible coat you tried to make me wear the
other day?"

"I gave it to the landlord, sir."

"I should have burned it, but perhaps he liked it."

"He did, sir. Will you try to go to sleep now?"

"If you had a shoulder on fire and aching as mine does, you wouldn't ask
such a ridiculous question," answered Jack snappishly.

"I'm sorry, sir. Is there aught I can do?"

"You can change the bandages, if you like. These are prodigious hot and
uncomfortable."

Without another word Salter set about easing his master, and he was so
painstaking and so careful not to hurt the ugly wound, and his face
expressed so much concern, that Carstares controlled a desire to swear
when he happened to touch a particularly tender spot, and at the end
rewarded him with a smile and a sigh of content.

"That is much better," he said. "You have such a light touch, Jim."

The man's face reddened with pleasure, but he said nothing, and walked
away to the window to draw the curtains.