And the last.


With such celerity did Mr. Balch work in behalf of his wards, that he soon
had everything in train for the recovery of the property.

At first George Stevens was inclined to oppose the execution of the will,
but he was finally prevailed upon by his advisers to make no difficulty
respecting it, and quietly resign what he must inevitably sooner or later
relinquish. Lizzie Stevens, on the contrary, seemed rather glad that an
opportunity was afforded to do justice to her old playmates, and won the
good opinion of all parties by her gentleness and evident anxiety to atone
for the wrong done them by her father. Even after the demands of the
executors of Mr. Garie were fully satisfied, such had been the thrift of
her father that there still remained a comfortable support for her and her
brother.

To poor Clarence this accession of fortune brought no new pleasure; he
already had sufficient for his modest wants; and now that his greatest hope
in life had been blighted, this addition of wealth became to him rather a
burden than a pleasure.

He was now completely excluded from the society in which he had so long
been accustomed to move; the secret of his birth had become widely known,
and he was avoided by his former friends and sneered at as a "nigger." His
large fortune kept some two or three whites about him, but he knew they
were leeches seeking to bleed his purse, and he wisely avoided their
society.

He was very wretched and lonely: he felt ashamed to seek the society of
coloured men now that the whites despised and rejected him, so he lived
apart from both classes of society, and grew moody and misanthropic.

Mr. Balch endeavoured to persuade him to go abroad--to visit Europe: he
would not. He did not confess it, but the truth was, he could not tear
himself away from the city where little Birdie dwelt, where he now and then
could catch a glimpse of her to solace him in his loneliness. He was
growing paler and more fragile-looking each day, and the doctor at last
frankly told him that, if he desired to live, he must seek some warmer
climate for the winter.

Reluctantly Clarence obeyed; in the fall he left New York, and during the
cold months wandered through the West India islands. For a while his health
improved, but when the novelty produced by change of scene began to decline
he grew worse again, and brooded more deeply than ever over his bitter
disappointment, and consequently derived but little benefit from the
change; the spirit was too much broken for the body to mend--his heart was
too sore to beat healthily or happily.

He wrote often now to Emily and her husband, and seemed desirous to atone
for his past neglect. Emily had written to him first; she had learned of
his disappointment, and gave him a sister's sympathy in his loneliness and
sorrow.

The chilly month of March had scarcely passed away when they received a
letter from him informing them of his intention to return. He wrote, "I am
no better, and my physician says that a longer residence here will not
benefit me in the least--that I came _too late_. I cough, cough, cough,
incessantly, and each day become more feeble. I am coming home, Emmy;
coming home, I fear, to die. I am but a ghost of my former self. I write
you this that you may not be alarmed when you see me. It is too late now to
repine, but, oh! Em, if my lot had only been cast with yours--had we never
been separated--I might have been to-day as happy as you are."

It was a clear bright morning when Charlie stepped into a boat to be
conveyed to the ship in which Clarence had returned to New York: she had
arrived the evening previous, and had not yet come up to the dock. The air
came up the bay fresh and invigorating from the sea beyond, and the water
sparkled as it dripped from the oars, which, with monotonous regularity,
broke the almost unruffled surface of the bay. Some of the ship's sails
were shaken out to dry in the morning sun, and the cordage hung loosely and
carelessly from the masts and yards. A few sailors lounged idly about the
deck, and leaned over the side to watch the boat as it approached. With
their aid it was soon secured alongside, and Charlie clambered up the
ladder, and stood upon the deck of the vessel. On inquiring for Clarence,
he was shown into the cabin, where he found him extended on a sofa.

He raised himself as he saw Charlie approach, and, extending his hand,
exclaimed,--"How kind! I did not expect you until we reached the shore."

For a moment, Charlie could not speak. The shock caused by Clarence's
altered appearance was too great,--the change was terrible. When he had
last seen him, he was vigorous-looking, erect, and healthful; now he was
bent and emaciated to a frightful extent. The veins on his temples were
clearly discernible; the muscles of his throat seemed like great cords; his
cheeks were hollow, his sunken eyes were glassy bright and surrounded with
a dark rim, and his breathing was short and evidently painful. Charlie held
his thin fleshless hand in his own, and gazed in his face with an anguished
expression.

"I look badly,--don't I Charlie?" said he, with assumed indifference;
"worse than you expected, eh?"

Charlie hesitated a little, and then answered,--"Rather bad; but it is
owing to your sea-sickness, I suppose; that has probably reduced you
considerably; then this close cabin must be most unfavourable to your
health. Ah, wait until we get you home, we shall soon have you better."

"Home!" repeated Clarence,--"home! How delightful that word sounds! I feel
it is going _home_ to go to you and Em." And he leant back and repeated the
word "home," and paused afterward, as one touches some favourite note upon
an instrument, and then silently listens to its vibrations. "How is Em?" he
asked at length.

"Oh, well--very well," replied Charlie. "She has been busy as a bee ever
since she received your last letter; such a charming room as she has
prepared for you!"

"Ah, Charlie," rejoined Clarence, mournfully, "I shall not live long to
enjoy it, I fear."

"Nonsense!" interrupted Charlie, hopefully; "don't be so desponding, Clary:
here is spring again,--everything is thriving and bursting into new life.
You, too, will catch the spirit of the season, and grow in health and
strength again. Why, my dear fellow," continued he, cheerfully, "you can't
help getting better when we once get hold of you. Mother's gruels, Doctor
Burdett's prescriptions, and Em's nursing, would lift a man out of his
coffin. Come, now, don't let us hear anything more about dying."

Clarence pressed his hand and looked at him affectionately, as though he
appreciated his efforts to cheer him and felt thankful for them; but he
only shook his head and smiled mournfully.

"Let me help your man to get you up. When once you get ashore you'll feel
better, I've no doubt. We are not going to an hotel, but to the house of a
friend who has kindly offered to make you comfortable until you are able to
travel."

With the assistance of Charlie and the servant, Clarence was gradually
prepared to go ashore. He was exceedingly weak, could scarcely totter
across the deck; and it was with some difficulty that they at last
succeeded in placing him safely in the boat. After they landed, a carriage
was soon procured, and in a short time thereafter Clarence was comfortably
established in the house of Charlie's friend.

Their hostess, a dear old motherly creature, declared that she knew exactly
what Clarence needed; and concocted such delicious broths, made such
strengthening gruels, that Clarence could not avoid eating, and in a day
or two he declared himself better than he had been for a month, and felt
quite equal to the journey to Philadelphia.

The last night of their stay in New York was unusually warm; and Clarence
informed Charlie he wished to go out for a walk. "I wish to go a long
distance,--don't think me foolish when I tell you where. I want to look at
the house where little Birdie lives. It may be for the last time. I have a
presentiment that I shall see her if I go,--I am sure I shall," added he,
positively, as though he felt a conviction that his desire would be
accomplished.

"I would not, Clary," remonstrated Charlie. "Your health won't permit the
exertion; it is a long distance, too, you say; and, moreover, don't you
think, my dear fellow, that it is far more prudent to endeavour, if
possible, to banish her from your mind entirely. Don't permit yourself to
think about her, if you can help it. You know she is unattainable by you,
and you should make an effort to conquer your attachment."

"It is too late--too late now, Charlie," he replied, mournfully. "I shall
continue to love her as I do now until I draw my last breath. I know it is
hopeless--I know she can never be more to me than she already is; but I
cannot help loving her. Let us go; I may see her once again. Ah, Charlie,
you cannot even dream what inexpressible pleasure the merest glimpse of her
affords me! Come, let us go."

Charlie would not permit him to attempt to walk; and they procured a
carriage, in which they rode to within a short distance of the house. The
mansion of Mr. Bates appeared quite gloomy as they approached it. The
blinds were down, and no lights visible in any part of the house.

"I am afraid they are out of town," remarked Charlie, when Clarence pointed
out the house; "everything looks so dull about it. Let us cross over to the
other pavement." And they walked over to the other side of the street, and
gazed upward at the house.

"Let us sit down here," suggested Clarence,--"here, on this broad stone;
it is quite dark now, and no one will observe us."

"No, no!" remonstrated Charlie; "the stone is too damp and cold."

"Is it?" said Clarence vacantly. And taking out his handkerchief, he spread
it out, and, in spite of Charlie's dissuasions, sat down upon it.

"Charlie," said he, after gazing at the house a long time in silence, "I
have often come here and remained half the night looking at her windows.
People have passed by and stared at me as though they thought me crazy; I
was half crazy then, I think. One night I remember I came and sat here for
hours; far in the night I saw her come to the window, throw up the
casement, and look out. That was in the summer, before I went away, you
know. There she stood in the moonlight, gazing upward at the sky, so pale,
so calm and holy-looking, in her pure white dress, that I should not have
thought it strange if the heavens had opened, and angels descended and
borne her away with them on their wings." And Clarence closed his eyes as
he concluded, to call back upon the mirror of his mind the image of little
Birdie as she appeared that night.

They waited a long while, during which there was no evidence exhibited that
there was any one in the house. At last, just as they were about to move
away, they descried the glimmer of a light in the room which Clarence
declared to be her room. His frame trembled with expectation, and he walked
to and fro opposite the house with an apparent strength that surprised his
companion. At length the light disappeared again, and with it Clarence's
hopes.

"Now then we must go," said Charlie, "it is useless for you to expose
yourself in this manner. I insist upon your coming home."

Reluctantly Clarence permitted himself to be led across the street again.
As they were leaving the pavement, he turned to look back again, and,
uttering a cry of surprise and joy, he startled Charlie by clutching his
arm. "Look! look!" he cried, "there she is--my little Birdie." Charlie
looked up at the window almost immediately above them, and observed a
slight pale girl, who was gazing up the street in an opposite direction.

"Little Birdie--little Birdie," whispered Clarence, tenderly. She did not
look toward them, but after standing there a few seconds, moved from
between the curtains and disappeared.

"Thank God for that!" exclaimed Clarence, passionately, "I knew--I knew I
should see her. _I knew it_," repeated he, exultingly; and then, overcome
with joy, he bowed his head upon Charlie's shoulder and wept like a child.
"Don't think me foolish, Charlie," apologized he, "I cannot help it. I will
go home now. Oh, brother, I feel so much happier." And with a step less
faint and trembling, he walked back to the carriage.

The following evening he was at home, but so enfeebled with the exertions
of the last two days, as to be obliged to take to his bed immediately after
his arrival. His sister greeted him affectionately, threw her arms about
his neck and kissed him tenderly; years of coldness and estrangement were
forgotten in that moment, and they were once more to each other as they
were before they parted.

Emily tried to appear as though she did not notice the great change in his
appearance, and talked cheerfully and encouragingly in his presence; but
she wept bitterly, when alone, over the final separation which she foresaw
was not far distant.

The nest day Doctor Burdett called, and his grave manner and apparent
disinclination to encourage any hope, confirmed the hopeless impression
they already entertained.

Aunt Ada came from Sudbury at Emily's request; she knew her presence would
give pleasure to Clarence, she accordingly wrote her to come, and she and
Emily nursed by turns the failing sufferer.

Esther and her husband, Mrs. Ellis and Caddy, and even Kinch, were
unremitting in their attentions, and did all in their power to amuse and
comfort him. Day by day he faded perceptibly, grew more and more feeble,
until at last Doctor Burdett began to number days instead of weeks as his
term of life. Clarence anticipated death with calmness--did not repine or
murmur. Father Banks was often with him cheering him with hopes of a
happier future beyond the grave.

One day he sent for his sister and desired her to write a letter for him.
"Em," said he, "I am failing fast; these fiery spots on my cheek, this
scorching in my palms, these hard-drawn, difficult breaths, warn me that
the time is very near. Don't weep, Em!" continued he, kissing her--"there,
don't weep--I shall be better off--happier--I am sure! Don't weep now--I
want you to write to little Birdie for me. I have tried, but my hand
trembles so that I cannot write legibly--I gave it up. Sit down beside me
here, and write; here is the pen." Emily dried her eyes, and mechanically
sat down to write as he desired. Motioning to him that she was ready, he
dictated--

"My Dear Little Birdie,--I once resolved never to write to you again, and
partially promised your father that I would not; then I did not dream that
I should be so soon compelled to break my resolution. Little Birdie, I am
dying! My physician informs me that I have but a few more days to live. I
have been trying to break away from earth's affairs and fix my thoughts on
other and better things. I have given up all but you, and feel that I
cannot relinquish you until I see you once again. Do not refuse me, little
Birdie! Show this to your father--he must consent to a request made by one
on the brink of the grave."

"There, that will do; let me read it over," said he, extending his hand for
the note. "Yes, I will sign it now--then do you add our address. Send it
now, Emily--send it in time for to-night's mail."

"Clary, do you think she will come?" inquired his sister.

"Yes," replied he, confidently; "I am sure she will if the note reaches
her." Emily said no more, but sealed and directed the note, which she
immediately despatched to the post-office; and on the following day it
reached little Birdie.

From the time when the secret of Clarence's birth had been discovered,
until the day she had received his note, she never mentioned his name. At
the demand of her father she produced his letters, miniature, and even the
little presents he had given her from time to time, and laid them down
before him without a murmur; after this, even when he cursed and denounced
him, she only left the room, never uttering a word in his defence. She
moved about like one who had received a stunning blow--she was dull, cold,
apathetic. She would smile vacantly when her father smoothed her hair or
kissed her cheek; but she never laughed, or sang and played, as in days
gone by; she would recline for hours on the sofa in her room gazing
vacantly in the air, and taking apparently no interest in anything about
her. She bent her head when she walked, complained of coldness about her
temples, and kept her hand constantly upon her heart.

Doctors were at last consulted; they pronounced her physically well, and
thought that time would restore her wonted animation; but month after month
she grew more dull and silent, until her father feared she would become
idiotic, and grew hopeless and unhappy about her. For a week before the
receipt of the note from Clarence, she had been particularly apathetic and
indifferent, but it seemed to rouse her into life again. She started up
after reading it, and rushed wildly through the hall into her father's
library.

"See here!" exclaimed she, grasping his arm--"see there--I knew it! I've
felt day after day that it was coming to that! You separated us, and now he
is dying--dying!" cried she. "Read it--read it!"

Her father took the note, and after perusing it laid it on the table, and
said coldly, "Well--"

"Well!" repeated she, with agitation--"Oh, father, it is not well! Father!"
said she, hurriedly, "you bid me give him up--told me he was
unworthy--pointed out to me fully and clearly why we could not marry: I
was convinced we could not, for I knew you would never let it be. Yet I
have never ceased to love him. I cannot control my heart, but I could my
voice, and never since that day have I spoken his name. I gave him up--not
that I would not have gladly married, knowing what he was--because you
desired it--because I saw either your heart must break or mine. I let mine
go to please you, and have suffered uncomplainingly, and will so suffer
until the end; but I _must_ see him once again. It will be a pleasure to
him to see me once again in his dying hour, and I _must_ go. If you love
me," continued she, pleadingly, as her father made a gesture of dissent,
"let us go. You see he is dying--begs you from the brink of the grave. Let
me go, only to say good bye to him, and then, perhaps," concluded she,
pressing her hand upon her heart, "I shall be better here."

Her father had not the heart to make any objection, and the next day they
started for Philadelphia. They despatched a note to Clarence, saying they
had arrived, which Emily received, and after opening it, went to gently
break its contents to her brother.

"You must prepare yourself for visitors, Clary," said she, "no doubt some
of our friends will call to-day, the weather is so very delightful."

"Do you know who is coming?" he inquired.

"Yes, dear," she answered, seating herself beside him, "I have received a
note stating that a particular friend will call to-day--one that you desire
to see."

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "it is little Birdie, is it not?"

"Yes," she replied, "they have arrived in town, and will be here to-day."

"Did not I tell you so?" said he, triumphantly. "I knew she would come. I
knew it," continued he, joyfully. "Let me get up--I am strong enough--she
is come--O! she has come."

Clarence insisted on being dressed with extraordinary care. His long
fierce-looking beard was trimmed carefully, and he looked much better than
he had done for weeks; he was wonderfully stronger, walked across the room,
and chatted over his breakfast with unusual animation.

At noon they came, and were shown into the drawing-room, where Emily
received them. Mr. Bates bowed politely, and expressed a hope that Mr.
Garie was better. Emily held out her hand to little Birdie, who clasped it
in both her own, and said, inquiringly: "You are his sister?"

"Yes," answered Emily. "You, I should have known from Clarence's
description--you are his little Birdie?"

She did not reply--her lip quivered, and she pressed Emily's hand and
kissed her. "He is impatient to see you," resumed Emily, "and if you are so
disposed, we will go up immediately."

"I will remain here," observed Mr. Bates, "unless Mr. Garie particularly
desires to see me. My daughter will accompany you."

Emily took the hand of little Birdie in her own, and they walked together
up the stairway. "You must not be frightened at his appearance," she
remarked, tearfully, "he is greatly changed."

Little Birdie only shook her head--her heart seemed too full for
speech--and she stepped on a little faster, keeping her hand pressed on her
breast all the while.

When they reached the door, Emily was about to open it, but her companion
stopped her, by saying: "Wait a moment--stop! How my heart beats--it almost
suffocates me." They paused for a few moments to permit little Birdie to
recover from her agitation, then throwing open the door they advanced into
the room.

"Clarence!" said his sister. He did not answer; he was looking down into
the garden. She approached nearer, and gently laying her hand on his
shoulder, said, "Here is your little Birdie, Clarence." He neither moved
nor spoke.

"Clarence!" cried she, louder. No answer. She touched his face--it was
warm. "He's fainted!" exclaimed she; and, ringing the bell violently, she
screamed for help. Her husband and the nurse rushed into the room; then
came Aunt Ada and Mr. Bates. They bathed his temples, held strong salts to
his nostrils--still he did not revive. Finally, the nurse opened his bosom
and placed her hand upon his heart. _It was still--quite still_: Clarence
was dead!

At first they could not believe it. "Let me speak to him," exclaimed little
Birdie, distractedly; "he will hear my voice, and answer. Clarence!
Clarence!" she cried. All in vain--all in vain. Clarence was dead!

They gently bore her away. That dull, cold look came back again upon her
face, and left it never more in life. She walked about mournfully for a few
years, pressing her hand upon her heart; and then passed away to join her
lover, where distinctions in race or colour are unknown, and where the
prejudices of earth cannot mar their happiness.

Our tale is now soon finished. They buried Clarence beside his parents;
coloured people followed him to his last home, and wept over his grave. Of
all the many whites that he had known, Aunt Ada and Mr. Balch were the only
ones that mingled their tears with those who listened to the solemn words
of Father Banks, "Ashes to ashes, dust to dust."

We, too, Clarence, cast a tear upon thy tomb--poor victim of prejudice to
thy colour! and deem thee better off resting upon thy cold pillow of earth,
than battling with that malignant sentiment that persecuted thee, and has
crushed energy, hope, and life from many stronger hearts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Aunt Ada Bell remained for a short time with Emily, and then returned to
Sudbury, where, during the remainder of her life, she never omitted an
opportunity of doing a kindness to a coloured person; and when the
increasing liberality of sentiment opened a way for the admission of
coloured pupils to the famous schools of Sudbury, they could always procure
board at her house, and Aunt Ada was a friend and mother to them.

Walters and dear old Ess reared a fine family; and the brown baby and her
sister took numberless premiums at school, to the infinite delight of their
parents. They also had a boy, whom they named "Charlie;" he inherited his
uncle's passionate fondness for marbles, which fondness, it has been
ascertained, is fostered by his uncle, who, 'tis said, furnishes the sinews
of war when there is a dearth in the treasury of Master Walters.

Kinch and Caddy were finally united, after various difficulties raised by
the latter, who found it almost impossible to procure a house in such a
state of order as would warrant her entering upon the blissful state of
matrimony. When it was all over, Kinch professed to his acquaintances
generally to be living in a perfect state of bliss; but he privately
intimated to Charlie that if Caddy would permit him to come in at the front
door, and not condemn him to go through the alley, whenever there happened
to be a shower--and would let him smoke where he liked--he would be much
more contented. When last heard from they had a little Caddy, the very
image of its mother--a wonderful little girl, who, instead of buying candy
and cake with her sixpences, as other children did, gravely invested them
in miniature wash-boards and dust-brushes, and was saving up her money to
purchase a tiny stove with a full set of cooking utensils. Caddy declares
her a child worth having.

Charles and Emily took a voyage to Europe for the health of the latter, and
returned after a two years' tour to settle permanently in his native city.
They were unremitting in their attention to father and mother Ellis, who
lived to good old age, surrounded by their children and grandchildren.