The Heir.


We must now return to Philadelphia, and pay a visit to the office of Mr.
Balch. We shall find that gentleman in company with Mr. Walters: both look
anxious, and are poring over a letter which is outspread before them.

"It was like a thunder-clap to me," said Mr. Balch: "the idea of there
being another heir never entered my brain--I didn't even know he had a
living relative."

"When did you get the letter?" asked Walters.

"Only this morning, and I sent for you immediately! Let us read it
again--we'll make another attempt to decipher this incomprehensible name.
Confound the fellow! why couldn't he write so that some one besides himself
could read it! We must stumble through it," said he, as he again began the
letter as follows:--

"Dear Sir,--Immediately on receipt of your favour, I called upon Mr.
Thurston, to take the necessary steps for securing the property of your
late client. To my great surprise, I found that another claimant had
started up, and already taken the preliminary measures to entering upon
possession. This gentleman, Mr.----

"Now, what would you call that name, Walters?--to me it looks like
Stimmens, or Stunners, or something of the kind!"

"Never mind the name," exclaimed Walters--"skip that--let me hear the rest
of the letter; we shall find out who he is soon enough, in all conscience."

"Well, then," resumed Mr. Balch--"This gentleman, Mr.----, is a resident in
your city; and he will, no doubt, take an early opportunity of calling on
you, in reference to the matter. It is my opinion, that without a will in
their favour, these children cannot oppose his claim successfully, if he
can prove his consanguinity to Mr. Garie. His lawyer here showed me a copy
of the letters and papers which are to be used as evidence, and, I must
say, they _are entirely_ without flaw. He proves himself, undoubtedly, to
be the first cousin of Mr. Garie. You are, no doubt, aware that these
children being the offspring of a slave-woman, cannot inherit, in this
State (except under certain circumstances), the property of a white father.
I am, therefore, very much afraid that they are entirely at his mercy."

"Well, then," said Walters, when Mr. Balch finished reading the letter, "it
is clear there is an heir, and his claim _must_ be well sustained, if such
a man as Beckley, the first lawyer in the State, does not hesitate to
endorse it; and as all the property (with the exception of a few thousands
in my hands) lies in Georgia, I'm afraid the poor children will come off
badly, unless this new heir prove to be a man of generosity--at all events,
it seems we are completely at his mercy."

"We must hope for the best," rejoined Mr. Balch. "If he has any heart, he
certainly will make some provision for them. The disappearance of that will
is to me most unaccountable! I am confident it was at his house. It seemed
so singular that none of his papers should be missing, except that--there
were a great many others, deeds, mortgages, &c. scattered over the floor,
but no will!"

The gentlemen were thus conversing, when they heard a tap at the door.
"Come in!" cried Mr. Balch; and, in answer to the request, in walked Mr.
George Stevens.

Mr. Walters and Mr. Balch bowed very stiffly, and the latter inquired what
had procured him the honour of a visit.

"I have called upon you in reference to the property of the late Mr.
Garie." "Oh! you are acting in behalf of this new claimant, I suppose?"
rejoined Mr. Balch.

"Sir!" said Mr. Stevens, looking as though he did not thoroughly understand
him.

"I said," repeated Mr. Balch, "that I presumed you called in behalf of this
new-found heir to Mr. Garie's property."

Mr. Stevens looked at him for a moment, then drawing himself up, exclaimed,
"I AM THE HEIR!"

"You!--_you_ the heir!" cried both the gentlemen, almost simultaneously.

"Yes, I am the heir!" coolly repeated Mr. Stevens, with an assured look. "I
am the first cousin of Mr. Garie!"

"You his first cousin?--it is impossible!" said Walters.

"You'll discover it is not only possible, but true--I am, as I said, Mr.
Garie's first cousin!"

"If you are that, you are more," said Walters, fiercely--"you're his
murderer!" At this charge Mr. Stevens turned deathly pale. "Yes," continued
Walters; "you either murdered him, or instigated others to do so! It was
you who directed the rioters against both him and me--I have proof of what
I say and can produce it. Now your motive is clear as day--you wanted his
money, and destroyed him to obtain it! His blood is on your hands!" hissed
Walters through his clenched teeth.

In the excitement consequent upon such a charge, Mr. Stevens, unnoticed by
himself, had overturned a bottle of red ink, and its contents had slightly
stained his hands. When Walters charged him with having Mr. Garie's blood
upon them, he involuntarily looked down and saw his hands stained with red.
An expression of intense horror flitted over his face when he observed it;
but quickly regaining his composure, he replied, "It's only a little ink."

"Yes, I know _that_ is ink," rejoined Walters, scornfully; "look at him,
Balch," he continued, "he doesn't dare to look either of us in the face."

"It's false," exclaimed Stevens, with an effort to appear courageous;
"it's as false as hell, and any man that charges me with it is a liar."

The words had scarcely passed his lips, when Walters sprang upon him with
the ferocity of a tiger, and seizing him by the throat, shook and whirled
him about as though he were a plaything.

"Stop, stop! Walters," cried Mr. Balch, endeavouring to loose his hold upon
the throat of Mr. Stevens, who was already purple in the face; "let him go,
this violence can benefit neither party. Loose your hold." At this
remonstrance, Walters dashed Stevens from him into the farthest corner of
the room, exclaiming, "Now, go and prosecute me if you dare, and I'll tell
for what I chastised you; prosecute me for an assault, if you think you can
risk the consequences."

Mr. Balch assisted him from the floor and placed him in a chair, where he
sat holding his side, and panting for breath. When he was able to speak, he
exclaimed, with a look of concentrated malignity, "Remember, we'll be even
some day; I never received a blow and forgot it afterwards, bear that in
mind."

"This will never do, gentlemen," said Mr. Balch, soothingly: "this conduct
is unworthy of you. You are unreasonable both of you. When you have cooled
down we will discuss the matter as we should."

"You'll discuss it alone then," said Stevens, rising, and walking to the
door: "and when you have any further communication to make, you must come
to me."

"Stop, stop, don't go," cried Mr. Balch, following him out at the door,
which they closed behind them; "don't go away in a passion, Mr. Stevens.
You and Walters are both too hasty. Come in here and sit down," said he,
opening the door of a small adjoining room, "wait here one moment, I'll
come back to you."

"This will never do, Walters," said he, as he re-entered his office; "the
fellow has the upper hand of us, and we must humour him; we should suppress
our own feelings for the children's sake. You are as well aware as I am of
the necessity of some compromise--we are in his power for the present, and
must act as circumstances compel us to."

"I can't discuss the matter with him," interrupted Walters, "he's an
unmitigated scoundrel. I couldn't command my temper in his presence for
five minutes. If you can arrange anything with him at all advantageous to
the children, I shall be satisfied, it will be more than I expect; only
bear in mind, that what I have in my hands belonging to Garie we must
retain, he knows nothing of that."

"Very well," rejoined Mr. Balch, "depend upon it I'll do my best;" and
closing the door, he went back to Mr. Stevens.

"Now, Mr. Stevens," said he, drawing up a chair, "we will talk over this
matter dispassionately, and try and arrive at some amicable arrangement: be
kind enough to inform me what your claims are."

"Mr. Balch, _you_ are a gentleman," began Mr. Stevens, "and therefore I'm
willing to discuss the matter thoroughly with you. You'll find me disposed
to do a great deal for these children: but I wish it distinctly understood
at the beginning, that whatever I may give them, I bestow as a favour. I
concede nothing to them as a right, legally they have not the slightest
claim upon me; of that you, who are an excellent lawyer, must be well
aware."

"We won't discuss that point at present, Mr. Stevens. I believe you
intimated you would be kind enough to say upon what evidence you purposed
sustaining your claims?"

"Well, to come to the point, then," said Stevens; "the deceased Mr. Garie
was, as I before said, my first cousin. His father and my mother were
brother and sister. My mother married in opposition to her parents'
desires; they cut her off from the family, and for years there was no
communication between them. At my father's death, my mother made overtures
for a reconciliation, which were contemptuously rejected, at length she
died. I was brought up in ignorance of who my grandparents were; and only a
few months since, on the death of my father's sister, did I make the
discovery. Here," said he, extending the packet of letters which, the
reader will remember once agitated, him so strangely, "here are the letters
that passed between my mother and her father."

Mr. Balch took up one and read:--


"_Savannah_, 18--

"MADAM,--Permit me to return this letter (wherein you
declare yourself the loving and repentant daughter of Bernard
Garie) and at the same time inform you, that by your own.
acts you have deprived yourself of all claim to that relation.
In opposition to my wishes, and in open defiance of my
express commands, you chose to unite your fortune
with one in every respect your inferior. If that union has
not resulted as happily as you expected, you must sustain
yourself by the reflection that you are the author of your own
misfortunes and alone to blame for your present miserable
condition.--Respectfully yours,

"BERNARD GARIE."


Mr. Balch read, one after another, letters of a similar purport--in fact, a
long correspondence between Bernard Garie and the mother of Mr. Stevens.
When he had finished, the latter remarked, "In addition to those, I can
produce my mother's certificate of baptism, her marriage certificate, and
every necessary proof of my being her son. If that does not suffice to make
a strong case, I am at a loss to imagine what will."

Mr. Balch pondered a few moments, and then inquired, looking steadily at
Mr. Stevens, "How long have you known of this relationship?"

"Oh, I've known it these three years."

"Three years! why, my dear sir, only a few moments ago you said a few
months."

"Oh, did I?" said Mr. Stevens, very much confused; "I meant, or should have
said, three years."

"Then, of course you were aware that Mr. Garie was your cousin when he
took the house beside you?"

"Oh, yes--that is--yes--yes; I _was_ aware of it."

"And did you make any overtures of a social character?" asked Mr. Balch.

"Well, yes--that is to say, my wife did."

"_Where were you the night of the murder?_"

Mr. Stevens turned pale at this question, and replied, hesitatingly, "Why,
at home, of course."

"You were at home, and saw the house of your cousins assaulted, and made no
effort to succour them or their children. The next morning you are one of
the coroner's inquest, and hurry through the proceedings, never once saying
a word of your relationship to them, nor yet making any inquiry respecting
the fate of the children. _It is very singular_."

"I don't see what this cross-questioning is to amount to; it has nothing to
do with my claim as heir."

"We are coming to that," rejoined Mr. Balch. "This, as I said, is very
singular; and when I couple it with some other circumstances that have come
to my knowledge, it is more than singular--_it is suspicious_. Here are a
number of houses assaulted by a mob. Two or three days before the assault
takes place, a list in your handwriting, and which is headed, '_Places to
be attacked_,' is found, under circumstances that leave no doubt that it
came directly from you. Well, the same mob that attacks these
places--_marked out by you_--traverse a long distance to reach the house of
your next-door neighbour. They break into it, and kill him; and you, who
are aware at the time that he is your own cousin, do not attempt to
interpose to prevent it, although it can be proved that you were
all-powerful with the marauders. No! you allow him to be destroyed without
an effort to save him, and immediately claim his property. Now, Mr.
Stevens, people disposed to be suspicions--seeing how much you were to be
the gainer by his removal, and knowing you had some connection with this
mob--might not scruple to say that _you_ instigated the attack by which he
lost his life; and I put it to you--now don't you think that, if it was any
one else, you would say that the thing looked suspicious?"

Mr. Stevens winced at this, but made no effort to reply.

Mr. Balch continued, "What I was going to remark is simply this. As we are
in possession of these facts, and able to prove them by competent
witnesses, we should not be willing to remain perfectly silent respecting
it, unless you made what _we_ regarded as a suitable provision for the
children."

"I'm willing, as I said before, to do something; but don't flatter yourself
I'll do any more than I originally intended from any fear of disclosures
from you. I'm not to be frightened," said Mr. Stevens.

"I'm not at all disposed to attempt to frighten you: however, you know how
far a mere statement of these facts would go towards rendering your
position in society more agreeable. A person who has been arrested on
suspicion of murder is apt to be shunned and distrusted. It can't be
helped; people are so very squeamish--they _will_ draw back, you know,
under such circumstances."

"I don't see how such a suspicion can attach itself to me," rejoined
Stevens, sharply.

"Oh, well, we won't discuss that any further: let me hear what you will do
for the children."

Mr. Balch saw, from the nervous and embarrassed manner of Mr. Stevens, that
the indirect threat of exposing him had had considerable effect; and his
downcast looks and agitation rather strengthened in his mind the suspicions
that had been excited by the disclosures of Mr. Walters.

After a few moments' silence, Mr. Stevens said, "I'll settle three thousand
dollars on each of the children. Now I think that is treating them
liberally."

"Liberally!" exclaimed Balch, in a tone of contempt--"liberally! You
acquire by the death of their father property worth one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars, and you offer these children, who are the rightful heirs,
three thousand dollars! That, sir, won't suffice." "I think it should,
then," rejoined Stevens. "By the laws of Georgia these children, instead of
being his heirs, are my slaves. Their mother was a slave before them, and
they were born slaves; and if they were in Savannah, I could sell them both
to-morrow. On the whole, I think I've made you a very fair offer, and I'd
advise you to think of it."

"No, Mr. Stevens; I shall accept no such paltry sum. If you wish a quick
and peaceful possession of what you are pleased to regard as your rights,
you must tender something more advantageous, or I shall feel compelled to
bring this thing into court, even at the risk of loss; and there, you know,
we should be obliged to make a clear statement of _everything_ connected
with this business. It might be advantageous to _us_ to bring the thing
fully before the court and public--but I'm exceedingly doubtful whether it
would advance _your_ interest."

Stevens winced at this, and asked, "What would you consider a fair offer?"

"I should consider _all_ a just offer, half a fair one, and a quarter as
little as you could have the conscience to expect us to take."

"I don't see any use in this chaffering, Mr. Balch," said Stephens; "you
can't expect me to give you any such sums as you propose. Name a sum that
you can reasonably expect to get."

"Well," said Mr. Balch, rising, "you must give us fifteen thousand dollars,
and you should think yourself well off then. We could commence a suit, and
put you to nearly that expense to defend it; to say nothing of the
notoriety that the circumstance would occasion you. Both Walters and I are
willing to spend both money and time in defence of these children's rights;
I assure you they are not friendless."

"I'll give twelve thousand, and not a cent more, if I'm hung for it," said
Mr. Stevens, almost involuntarily.

"Who spoke of hanging?" asked Mr. Balch.

"Oh!" rejoined Stevens, "that is only my emphatic way of speaking." "Of
course, you meant figuratively," said Mr. Balch, in a tone of irony;
mentally adding, "as I hope you may be one day literally."

Mr. Stevens looked flushed and angry, but Mr. Balch continued, without
appearing to notice him, and said: "I'll speak to Walters. Should he
acquiesce in your proposal, I am willing to accept it; however, I cannot
definitely decide without consulting him. To-morrow I will inform you of
the result."