CONNIVANCE OF MEN AND FORESTS.


Thus the tragic forests of Brittany once more resumed their ancient
rôle of servant and accomplice to revolution.

The subsoil of such a forest was like a madrepore pierced and
intersected in all directions by a secret labyrinth of mines, cells,
and galleries. Each of these hidden cells was large enough to shelter
five or six men; the only difficulty was in breathing. Certain
mysterious ciphers have been preserved that give us a clew to this
powerful organization of the peasant rebellion. In Ille-et-Vilaine, in
the forest of Pertre, where the Prince de Talmont had taken refuge,
not a breath could be heard, not a trace of human life was visible;
and yet Focard had there mustered six thousand men. In Morbihan,
in the forest of Meulac, not a man of all the eight thousand there
was to be seen. These two forests, le Pertre and Meulac, are not,
however, to be reckoned among the great Breton forests. It would have
been dangerous walking over their explosive soil. These treacherous
copses, with their multitudes of combatants lurking in a sort of
subterranean labyrinth, were like great black sponges, from which,
beneath the pressure of Revolution's giant foot, civil war gushed
forth. Invisible battalions were lying in wait. This army, unknown to
the world, wound its way along under the feet of the Republican armies,
leaping out of the ground at times in vast numbers, and disappearing
as suddenly,--possessing the power of vanishing at will no less than
the gift of ubiquity. It was like the descending avalanche that leaves
but a cloud of dust behind, colossi with a marvellous genius for
contraction, giants in warfare, dwarfs in flight, jaguars with the
habits of moles. Moreover, there were woods as well as forests. As the
village ranks below the city, so the woods, bear a similar relation
to the forests, which they serve to connect after the fashion of a
labyrinth. Old castles, fortresses once upon a time, hamlets that had
been camps, farms covered with ambushes and snares, divided by ditches
and fenced in by trees, formed the meshes of the net in which the
Republican armies were caught.

All this was called the Bocage.

There was the wood of Misdon, with a pond in its midst, held by
Jean Chouan; the wood of Gennes, held by Taillefer; the wood of La
Huisserie, held by Gouge-le-Bruant; the wood of La Charnie, held by
Courtillé-le-Bâtard, called the apostle Saint Paul, chief of the
camp of the Vache-Noire; the wood of Burgault, in possession of that
enigmatical Monsieur Jacques, who was to meet with a mysterious death
in the vault of Juvardeil; the wood of Charreau, where Pimousse and
Petit-Prince, when attacked by the garrison of Châteauneuf, captured
the grenadiers from the ranks of the Republicans in a hand-to-hand
encounter; the wood of La Heureuserie, which witnessed the defeat of
the military post of Longue-Faye; the wood of L'Aulne, whence the road
between Rennes and Laval could be watched; the wood of La Gravelle,
won by a Prince of La Tremoille in a bowling-match; the wood of Lorges
in the Côtes-du-Nord, where Charles de Boishardy succeeded Bernard de
Villeneuve; the wood of Bagnard, near Fontenay, where Lescure offered
battle to Chalbos,--a challenge accepted by the latter although they
were five to one against him; the wood of La Durondais, over which
Alain le Redru and Hérispoux, sons of Charles the Bald, quarrelled in
former times; the wood of Croque-loup, on the edge of that moor where
Coupereau used to shear the prisoners; the wood of La Croix-Bataille,
witness to the Homeric insults hurled against each other by Jambe
d'Argent and Morière; the wood of La Saudraie, which the reader will
remember was reconnoitred by the Paris battalion; and many others
besides.

In several of these forests and woods there were not only subterranean
villages grouped around the burrow-like headquarters of the chief,
but actual hamlets composed of low cabins hidden under the trees in
such numbers that the forest was often filled with them. Sometimes the
smoke betrayed their presence. Two among these hamlets in the forest
of Misdon have become famous,--Lorrière, near Létang, and the group of
huts called La Rue-de-Bau, in the direction of Saint-Ouen-les-Toits.

The women lived in the huts, and the men in the caves. The galleries
of the fairies and the old Celtic mines were utilized for purposes
of warfare. Food was conveyed to the dwellers underground, and some
there were who, forgotten, died of hunger. They, however, were awkward
fellows, who had not sense enough to uncover their wells. This cover,
usually made of moss and branches, and arranged so skilfully that it
was impossible to distinguish it on the outside from the surrounding
grass, was yet easily opened and closed from the inside. A den like
this, known under the name of "la loge," was hollowed out with great
care, and the earth taken therefrom thrown into some neighboring pond.
The inside walls and the floor were afterwards lined with ferns and
moss. It was fairly comfortable, save for the lack of light, fire,
bread, and air.

To rise from underground and appear among the living without due
precaution, possibly to disinter themselves at an inappropriate
moment, would be a serious business. They might chance to encounter an
army on the march. Those were dangerous woods, snares with a double
trap. The Blues dared not enter, and the Whites dared not come out.