THE USEFULNESS OF BIG LETTERS.


Some one was surely caught in a trap.

Who could it be?

A shudder shook this man of steel.

It could not be he. His arrival could not have been discovered. It was
impossible for the representatives to have learned it already, for he
had but just stepped on shore. The corvette had surely foundered with
all on board; and even on the corvette Boisberthelot and La Vieuville
were the only men who knew his name.

The bells kept up their savage sport. He counted them mechanically,
and in the abrupt transition from the assurance of perfect safety to
a terrible sense of danger, his thoughts wandered restlessly from
one conjecture to another. However, after all, this ringing might be
accounted for in many different ways, and he finally reassured himself
by repeating, "In short, no one knows of my arrival here, or even my
name."

For several minutes there had been a slight noise overhead and behind
him,--a sound resembling the rustling of a leaf; at first he took no
notice of it, but as it continued, persisted, one might almost say, he
finally turned. It was really a leaf,--a leaf of paper. The wind was
struggling to tear off a large placard that was pasted on the milestone
above his head. The placard had but just been pasted; for it was still
moist, and had become a prey to the wind, which in its sport had partly
detached it.

The old man had not perceived it, because he had ascended the dune on
the opposite side.

He stepped up on the stone where he had been sitting, and placed his
hand on the corner of the placard that fluttered in the wind. The sky
was clear; in June the twilight lasts a long time, and although it was
dark at the foot of the dune, the summit was still light. A part of the
notice was printed in large letters; it was yet sufficiently light to
read it, and this was what he read:--

      THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, ONE AND INDIVISIBLE.

      We, Prieur of the Marne, representative of the people,
      in command of the army on the coast of Cherbourg, give
      notice, That the ci-devant Marquis of Lantenac, Viscount
      of Fontenay, calling himself a Breton prince, and who has
      secretly landed on the coast of Granville, is outlawed.
      A price has been set upon his head. Whoever captures him
      dead or alive will receive sixty thousand livres. This sum
      will be paid in gold, and not in paper money. A battalion
      of the army of the coast guards of Cherbourg will be at
      once despatched for the apprehension of the former Marquis
      of Lantenac. The inhabitants of the parishes are ordered
      to lend their aid.

      Given at the Town Hall of Granville the second of June,
      1793.

      Signed: PRIEUR, DE LA MARNE.

Below this name there was another signature written in smaller
characters, which the fading light prevented him from deciphering.
Pulling his hat down over his eyes, and muffling himself in his
sea-cape up to his chin, the old man hastily descended the dune.
Evidently it was not safe to tarry any longer on this lighted summit.

Perhaps he had stayed there too long already. The top of the dune was
the only point of the landscape that still remained visible.

When he had descended and found himself in the darkness he slackened
his pace.

He took the road leading to the farm which he had traced out, evidently
believing himself safe in that direction. It was absolute solitude.
There were no passers-by at this hour.

Stopping behind a clump of bushes, he unfastened his cloak, turned his
waistcoat with the hairy side out, refastened his cloak, that was but a
rag held by a string around his neck, and resumed his journey.

It was bright moonlight.

He came to a place where two roads forked, and on the pedestal
of the old stone cross which stood there a white square could be
distinguished,--undoubtedly another placard like the one he had lately
read. As he drew near to it he heard a voice.

"Where are you going?" it said; and turning he beheld a man in the
hedge-row, tall like himself, and of about the same age, with hair as
white and garments even more ragged than his own,--almost his very
double.

The man stood leaning on a long staff.

"I asked you where you were going? he repeated.

"In the first place, tell me where I am," was the reply, uttered in
tones of almost haughty composure.

And the man answered,--

"You are in the seigneury of Tanis, of which I am the beggar and you
the lord."

"I?"

"Yes, you,--monsieur le marquis de Lantenac."