MEN.


The peasant has confidence in the field that nourishes him, no less
than in the wood that serves to hide him. It is no easy matter to
conceive an idea of the forests of Brittany. They were cities in
themselves. Nothing could be more secret, more silent, or more
impenetrable than those tangled thickets of briers and branches
offering shelter, repose, and silence. No solitude could seem more
death-like and sepulchral; if one could, like a flash of lightning,
have felled the entire forest at a single stroke, a swarm of human
beings would have stood forth revealed within those shades.

Concealed on the outside by coverings of stones and branches were
wells, round and narrow, sinking at first vertically and then
horizontally, widening under the ground like funnels, and ending in
dark chambers. Wells like these discovered by Westermann in Brittany
were also found in Egypt by Cambyses,--with this difference, that
while the Egyptian caves in the desert held dead men only, those in the
forests of Brittany contained living human beings. One of the wildest
glades in the woods of Misdon, intersected by subterranean passages and
cells, wherein a mysterious population moved to and fro, was called "la
Grande Ville." Another glade, just as deserted above ground, and no
less populous below, was called "la Place Royale."

This subterranean life in Brittany had existed from time immemorial.
Man had there sought refuge from his brother man. Hence these
hiding-places, like the dens of reptiles, hollowed out under the trees.
They dated from the times of the Druids, and some of the crypts were as
old as the dolmens. All the evil spirits of legend and the monsters of
history passed over this gloomy land,--Teutates, Cæsar, Hoël, Néomène,
Geoffrey of England, Alain of the iron glove, Pierre Mauclerc, the
French house of Blois and the English house of Montfort, kings and
dukes, the nine barons of Brittany, the judges of the Great Days, the
counts of Nantes who wrangled with the counts of Rennes, highwaymen,
banditti, Free Lances, René II., the Viscount de Rohan, the king's
governors, the "good Duke de Chaulnes" who hung the peasants under
the windows of Madame de Sévigné, the seignorial butcheries in the
fifteenth century, religious wars in the sixteenth and seventeenth,
and the thirty thousand dogs trained to hunt men in the eighteenth.
During this wild trampling, the people made up their minds that it
would be better for them to disappear. One after the other, the
troglodytes seeking to escape from the Celts, the Celts from the
Romans, the Bretons from the Normans, the Huguenots from the Catholics,
and the smugglers from the excise officers, had sought refuge first
in the forests, then underground. It is thus that tyranny forces the
nations to the last resource of the hunted beast. For two thousand
years had despotism, in all its varied forms,--of conquest, vassalage,
fanaticism, and taxation,--hunted down this unfortunate and distracted
Brittany; it was like an inexorable _battue_ constantly changing its
method of attack. Men disappeared underground. While that terror which
is a sort of rage was brooding in human souls, and the dens in the
forests were in waiting for them, the French Republic sprang into
existence. Brittany, thinking this compulsory deliverance but a new
form of oppression, broke into open rebellion,--a mistake usually made
by enslaved peoples.