THEIR LIFE UNDER GROUND.


The men, wearied of living in these beasts' lairs, would sometimes
venture to come out by night and dance on the neighboring moor; or else
they said prayers, by way of killing time. "Jean Chouan made us say our
beads from morning till night," says Bourdoiseau.

It was almost impossible, when the season arrived, to prevent the men
of Bas-Maine from going to the Fête de la Gerbe. They clung to their
own ideas. Tranche-Montagne says that Denys disguised himself as a
woman, to go to the play at Laval; after which he returned to his den.

All at once they would rush out in search of death, changing one tomb
for another.

Sometimes they would lift the cover of their grave and listen for any
chance sounds of battle in the distance, following it with their ears,
guided by the steady fire of the Republicans and the intermittent
shots of the Royalists. When the platoon-firing suddenly ceased, they
knew that the Royalists had lost the day; but if the scattering shots
continued, receding into the distance, it was a sign that the victory
was theirs. The Whites always pursued; the Blues never did so, because
the country was against them.

These underground belligerents were wonderfully well-informed.
Nothing could be more rapid or more mysterious than their means of
communication. The bridges and wagons had all been destroyed, yet they
found means to keep one another informed of all that went on, and to
send timely warning. Messenger-stations of danger were established from
forest to forest, from village to village, from hut to hut, from bush
to bush.

A stupid-looking peasant might be seen passing along; he carried
despatches in his hollow staff.

Furnished by Boétidoux, a former constituent, with the modern
Republican passport, in which a blank space is left for the name,
bundles of which were in the possession of that traitor, they were
enabled to travel from one end of Brittany to the other.

It was impossible to take them by surprise. Puysaye[1] states that
"secrets confided to upwards of four thousand individuals have been
religiously kept."

It seemed as though this quadrilateral, closed on the south by the line
from Sables to Thouars, on the east by that from Thouars to Saumur as
well as by the river of Thoué, on the north by the Loire, and on the
west by the ocean, possessed a system of nerves in common, and that no
single part of the ground could stir without shaking the whole. In
the twinkling of an eye, they learned in Luçon what was going on in
Noirmoutier, and the camp of La Loué knew what was passing in the camp
La Croix-Morineau. It was as if the birds had carried the news. On the
7th Messidor, in the year III., Hoche wrote: "One might have supposed
they had telegraphs."

They formed clans, as in Scotland, and each parish had its own captain.
My father fought in this war, and I know whereof I am speaking.


[Footnote 1: Vol. ii. p. 35.]