THE FORESTS.



There were in Brittany at that time seven much-dreaded forests. The
Vendean war was a rebellion among priests, and the forest was their
auxiliary. The spirits of darkness help one another.

The seven Black Forests of Brittany were the forest of Fougères, which
bars the passage between Dol and Avranches; the forest of Princé, eight
miles in circumference; the forest of Paimpont, abounding in ravines
and brooks, and almost inaccessible in the direction of Baignon, with
an easy retreat towards Concornet, which was a Royalist town; the
forest of Rennes, whence could be heard the tocsin of the Republican
parishes, always numerous in the neighborhood of cities,--there it
was that Puysaye lost Focard; the forest of Machecoul, where Charette
dwelt like a wild beast; the forest of La Garnache, belonging to
the Trémoilles, the Gauvains, and the Rohans; and the forest of
Brocéliande, that had been appropriated by the fairies.

One nobleman in Brittany was called the _Seigneur des Sept-Forêts_, and
he was the Viscount de Fontenay, a Breton prince.

For the Breton prince was a creation quite distinct from the French
prince. The Rohans were Breton princes. Gamier de Saintes, in his
report to the Convention of the 15th Nivôse, year II., thus describes
the Prince de Talmont,--"That Capet of brigands, the sovereign of Maine
and Normandy."

The events that transpired in Breton forests from 1792 to 1800
would form a history in themselves, blending like a legend with the
stupendous affair of the Vendée.

There is truth in legend as well as in history, but the nature of
legendary truth differs from that of historic truth. The former may be
invention; but its result is reality. Both, however, have the same aim,
inasmuch as each strives to depict the eternal type of mankind under
the transitory specimen.

The Vendée cannot be fully understood unless legend is allowed to
supplement history; history must present the total effect, legend
describe the details.

We cannot refuse to acknowledge that the Vendée is well worth the
trouble, for it is a prodigy.

That War of the Ignorant, so dull and yet so splendid, so detestable
and at the same time so magnificent, was at once the despair and the
pride of the nation. In the act of wounding France, the Vendée covered
her with glory. There are times when human society presents enigmas
whose meaning becomes evident to the wise, while for the ignorant it
remains obscure, signifying nothing more than violence and barbarism.
A philosopher is slow to accuse. He takes into consideration the
disturbances caused by these problems, which never pass without casting
a shadow like a cloud.

He who would understand the Vendée must picture the antagonism of the
French Revolution on the one hand, and the Breton peasant on the other.

Face to face with these unparalleled events,--this tremendous
promise of every advantage at once, this fit of rage on the part of
civilization, this excess of infuriated progress, to be accompanied by
an improvement that could neither be measured nor understood,--stands
this serious and peculiar savage, this man with the keen eyes and long
hair, who lives on milk and chestnuts; whose ideas are bounded by his
roof, by his hedge, and by his ditch; who can distinguish each village
by the sound of its bells; who drinks nothing but water, yet wears a
leather waistcoat worked with silken arabesques,--a man uncultivated,
dressed in embroidered garments, who tattoes his clothes as his
ancestors the Celts used to tattoo their faces; who respects his master
in the person of his executioner; who speaks a dead language, which is
equivalent to keeping his mind in a tomb, goading his oxen, sharpening
his scythe, hoeing his black grain, kneading his buckwheat cake;
reverencing, first his plough, and secondly his grandmother; believing
in the Blessed Virgin, and in the White Lady no less; worshipping
before the altar, and also before the tall mysterious stone set up in
the midst of the moor,--a laborer in the plain, a fisherman on the
coast, a poacher in the thicket, devoted to his kings, his priests,
his lords, and to his very lice; a man of pensive mood, often standing
motionless for hours on the wide deserted shore, listening gloomily to
the sounding sea.

Is it then strange that this blind man failed to appreciate the light?