THE VENDÉE HAS RUINED BRITTANY.



Brittany is an old rebel. In all her revolts in the past two
thousand years she has had the right on her side until now; in
her last rebellion she was wrong. And yet, after all, whether she
was fighting against revolution or against monarchy, against the
acting representative or against the ruling dukes and peers, against
the financial resource of the assignats or the oppression of the
salt-tax,--whoever might be fighting, whether it were Nicolas Rapin,
François de La Noue, Captain Pluviaut, and The Lady of La Garnache, or
Stofflet, Coquereau, and Lechandelier de Pierreville, and whether they
were fighting under M. de Rohan against the king, or under M. de La
Rochejaquelein for the king, it was practically the same war, that of
local government against centralization.

These ancient provinces might be compared with a pond; stagnant water
is not inclined to flow; the wind, instead of rousing it to life,
simply irritates it. France ended at Finistère; that was the limit of
the space granted to man, and there the forward march of generations
ceased. "Pause!" cries the ocean to the land, and barbarism to
civilization. Whenever it feels the influence of any excitement in
Paris, whatever may be the occasion thereof, monarchy or republic,
despotism or liberty, it is an innovation, and Brittany bristles
with alarm, and says, "Let us alone! What do you want of us?" The
Marais seizes its pitchfork, and the Bocage grasps its musket. All
our attempts at reform in matters of education and legislation, our
philosophical systems, our men of genius, our triumphs, fail before the
Houroux; the tocsin of Bazouges holds the French Revolution in awe;
the moor of Faou defies the stormy assemblies on our public squares;
and the belfry of Haut-des-Près declares war against the Tower of the
Louvre. Terrible blindness!

The Vendean insurrection was a melancholy misunderstanding.

An affray on a gigantic scale, wrangling among Titans, a colossal
rebellion, fated to bequeath but one word to history, _The Vendée_,--a
glorious though melancholy word, devoting itself to death for the
absent, sacrificing itself to egotism, squandering its dauntless
courage, offering itself in the cause of cowards, with neither
foresight nor strategy, without tactics, plan, or aim, following no
leader, accepting no responsibility, showing how powerless the human
will may become, uniting the spirit of chivalry with the deeds of the
savage, absurdity at its height, darkness screening itself from the
light, ignorance offering a determined resistance to truth, justice,
right, reason, and deliverance, the terror of eight years, the
devastation of fourteen departments, the ravages in the fields, the
destruction of crops, the burning of villages, the ruin of cities, the
massacre of women and children, the torch applied to the thatch, the
sword plunged into the heart, the terror of civilization, the hope of
Mr. Pitt,--such was this war, an unreasoning attempt at parricide.

On the whole, the Vendée has served the cause of progress by
showing the necessity of scattering the ancient shadows of Brittany
by discharging into its thickets all the arrows of enlightenment
Catastrophes have a gloomy way of settling affairs.