THEIR LIFE IN WARFARE.



Many of them had nothing but pikes; but good hunting-rifles were
plentiful, and no marksmen were more expert than the poachers of the
Bocage and the smugglers of Loroux. They were eccentric, terrible, and
intrepid fighters. The proclamation of a decree to levy three hundred
thousand men was the signal for ringing the tocsin in six hundred
villages. The flames burst forth in all directions at once. Poitou
and the Anjou revolted on the same day. Let us remark that the first
rumbling was heard on the 8th of July, 1792, a month previous to the
10th of August, on the moor of Kerbader. Alain Redeler, whose name is
now forgotten, was the forerunner of La Rochejaquelein and Jean Chouan.
The Royalists forced all able-bodied men to march, under penalty of
death. They confiscated harnesses, wagons, and provisions. Sapinaud
at once assembled three thousand soldiers, Cathelineau ten thousand,
Stofflet twenty thousand, and Charette took possession of Noirmoutier.
The Viscount de Scépeaux roused the Haut-Anjou, the Chevalier de
Dieuzie the Entre-Vilaine-et-Loire, Tristan l'Hermite the Bas-Maine,
the barber Gaston the city of Guéménée, and the Abbé Bernier all the
others.

It required but little to excite the masses. A great black cat was
placed in the tabernacle of a priest who had taken the civil oath,--a
"priest-juror," as he was called,--whence it suddenly leaped forth in
the middle of the Mass. "It's the Devil!" cried the peasants, and a
whole district rose in revolt. Sometimes flames would be seen issuing
from the confessionals. For assailing the Blues and crossing the
ravines, they had sticks fifteen feet long, called the "ferte,"--a
weapon of defence, which was likewise available for flight. In the very
heat of the conflict, when the peasants were attacking the Republican
squares, if they chanced to see on the battlefield a cross or a chapel,
all fell on their knees and said their prayers under the fire of the
enemy; and after finishing the rosary, those who had not been killed
rushed upon the enemy. Alas! what giants were these! They loaded their
muskets on the run; that was their special talent. They could be made
to believe anything. Their priests showed them other priests whose
necks had been reddened by a tightly drawn cord, saying to them:
"These are the guillotined come to life again." They had their fits of
chivalrous emotion; they paid military honors to Fesque, a Republican
standard-bearer, who had allowed himself to be sabred without once
losing hold of his banner. These peasants were at times derisive;
they called the married Republican priests "sans-calottes devenus
sans-culottes."[2] At first they stood in awe of the cannon; but after
a while they dashed upon them with no other weapons than their sticks,
and captured several. The first one they took was a fine bronze cannon,
which they baptized "le Missionnaire;" another gun, dating from the
times of the Catholic wars, and which had Richelieu's arms and an
image of the Virgin engraved upon it, they named Marie-Jeanne. When
they lost Fontenay, they lost Marie-Jeanne, around which six hundred
peasants fell fighting with unflinching courage.

Later, they recaptured Fontenay in order to recover Marie-Jeanne,
which they brought back under the fleur-de-lis flag, covering it with
flowers, and making the women who passed by kiss it. But two cannon
were insufficient. It was Stofflet who had captured Marie-Jeanne;
Cathelineau, envying him, left Pin-en-Mange, attacked Jallais, and took
possession of a third one. Forest fell on Saint-Florent and captured
a fourth. Two other commanders, Chouppes and Saint-Paul, were still
more successful. They manufactured imitation-cannon from the trunks
of trees, using manikins for gunners; and with this artillery, over
which they made merry, they forced the Blues to retreat to Mareuil.
At that time they were in the height of their glory. Later, when
Chalbos defeated La Marsonnière, the peasants left behind them on the
dishonored battlefield two cannon, bearing the arms of England. At
that time the French princes were paid by England, who, as Nantiat
writes on the 10th of May, 1794, "remitted funds to Monseigneur because
Mr. Pitt was told that it was the proper thing to do." Mellinet, in
a report of the 31st of March, says: "The cry of the rebels is,'Long
live the English!'" The peasants tarried for purposes of pillage, for
these devotees were thieves. Savages have their vices, and it is to
these that civilization appeals. Puysaye says: "Several times I have
saved the town of Plélan from pillage." And again he says that he
refrained from entering Montfort: "I made a circuit in order to avoid
the sacking of the houses of the Jacobins."[3] They pillaged Cholet;
they sacked Chalans; passing by Granville, they robbed Ville-Dieu. They
called the country-people who joined the Blues the "Jacobin herd," and
exterminated them more fiercely than they did their other foes. They
enjoyed carnage like soldiers, and revelled in massacre like brigands.
To shoot the _patauds_ was their delight. They called it breaking their
fast.

At Fontenay one of their priests, named Barbotin, killed an old man
with a blow from his sabre. At Saint-Germain-sur-Ille [4] one of their
captains, a nobleman, shot the solicitor of the Commune, and took his
watch. At Machecoul for the space of five weeks they made a practice of
slaughtering the Republicans at the rate of thirty a day. Each string
of thirty they called a rosary. Behind this row of men there was a
trench prepared, into which the men fell back as they were shot; and
when, as sometimes happened, a man was still alive, he was buried as if
he were dead. Such acts have been witnessed in our own times. Joubert,
president of the district, had his wrists sawed off. They had handcuffs
for the Blues made expressly to cut the flesh. They slaughtered them
in the public squares, sounding the halloo. Charette, who signed
himself, "Fraternity, Chevalier Charette," and who, like Marat, wore a
handkerchief knotted around his brows, burned the city of Pornic, with
the inhabitants in their dwellings.

Meanwhile Carrier was frightful. Terror answered unto terror. The
Breton rebel looked very much like the Greek insurgent, clad as he was
in a short jacket, with a gun slung across his shoulders, leggings,
wide trousers of a material not unlike fustian. The lads resembled a
Greek klepht. Henri de la Rochejaquelein went into this war at the age
of twenty-one, armed with a pair of pistols and a stick. There were one
hundred and fifty-four divisions in the Vendean army. They laid regular
sieges. The city of Bressuire was invested by them for three days. On
a Good Friday ten thousand peasants bombarded the city of des Sables
with red-hot cannon-balls. They succeeded in destroying in one day the
fourteen Republican cantonments from Montigné to Courbeveilles. On
the high wall at Thouars the following astonishing dialogue was heard
between La Rochejaquelein and a lad: "Fellow!" "Here I am."--"Lend me
your shoulders to climb up on." "Take them."--"Give me your gun." "Here
it is." And La Rochejaquelein leaped into the city, and thus without
the aid of scaling-ladders they captured the very towers once besieged
by Duguesclin. They valued a cartridge far beyond a gold louis. They
burst into tears whenever they lost sight of their village belfry.
To run away seemed to them the simplest affair in the world. At such
times their leaders would exclaim, "Throw away your sabots, but keep
your guns!" When munitions failed, they said their beads, and proceeded
to take the powder from the caissons of the Republican artillery; and
afterwards d'Elbée demanded powder from the English. On the approach
of the enemy they concealed their wounded in the tall grain, or among
the brakes, and came back for them after the engagement was over. They
wore no uniform, and their clothing was falling to pieces. Noblemen as
well as peasants wore any rags that came to hand. Roger Mouliniers was
arrayed in a turban and dolman taken from the ward-robe of the Théâtre
de La Flèche; the Chevalier de Beauvilliers had a barrister's gown,
and a lady's bonnet over a woollen cap. All wore the white belt and
scarf. The different grades were indicated by a knot. Stofflet wore a
red knot, La Rochejaquelein a black one. Wimpfen, a semi-Girondist, and
who moreover had never been out of Normandy, wore the armlets of the
Carabots of Caen.

They had women in their ranks,--Madame de Lescure, who afterwards
became Madame de la Rochejaquelein; Thérèse de Mollien, mistress
of La Rouarie, she who burned the list of parishes; Madame de la
Rochefoucauld, young and beautiful, who sabre in hand rallied the
peasants at the foot of the Tower of the Château Puy-Rousseau; and
Antoinette Adams, styled the Chevalier Adams, so brave that when
captured she was shot standing, out of respect for her courage. This
epic period was a cruel one. Men behaved like maniacs. Madame de
Lescure deliberately walked her horse over the Republicans who lay
disabled on the battle-ground. She said they were dead, but very
possibly they may have been only wounded. There was occasionally
a traitor among the men, but never among the women. It is true,
Mademoiselle Fleury of the French Theatre forsook La Rouarie for Marat;
but that was for love's sake. The commanders were often as ignorant as
the soldiers. M. de Sapinaud could not spell correctly; he wrote, "Nous
_orions_ de notre _cauté._"

The leaders hated one another. The captains of the Marais cried, "Down
with the Mountaineers!" Their cavalry was few in numbers, and difficult
to form. Puysaye writes: "A man who would cheerfully give me his two
sons grows cool when I ask for one of his horses." Poles, pitchforks,
scythes, muskets, old and new, poacher's knives, spits, iron-pointed
cud-gels studded with nails,--such were their weapons. Some carried
a cross made of two human bones. They rushed to the attack with
shouts, springing up at once from all quarters,--from woods, hills,
underbrush, and hollow roads,--ranging themselves in a circle, killing,
exterminating, striking terror, and then disappearing. Whenever they
passed a Republican town they cut down the liberty-pole, set it on
fire, and forming in a circle, danced around it. All their activity
was displayed by night. The rule of the Vendean is to be always
unexpected. They would march fifteen leagues in utter silence, without
so much as stirring a blade of grass. At night, their chiefs having
determined in a council of war at what point the Republican posts were
to be surprised the next day, they loaded their muskets, mumbled their
prayers, and taking off their sabots, filed through the woods in long
columns, barefoot across the heather and moss, noiseless, without
uttering a sound or drawing a breath, like a procession of cats in the
darkness.


[Footnote 2: The uncapped become unbreeched.--TR.]

[Footnote 3: Puysaye, vol. ii. pp. 187, 434.]

[Footnote 4: Ibid., p. 35.]