THE SOUL OF THE EARTH PASSES INTO MAN.


The number of the rebels in the Vendée, including men, women, and
children, cannot be estimated at less than five hundred thousand.
Tuffin de la Rouarie states the sum total of the combatants to have
been half a million.

The federalists helped them, and the Vendée had the Gironde on its
side also. Lozère sent thirty thousand men into the Bocage. Eight
departments formed a coalition: five in Brittany, three in Normandy.
Évreux, who fraternized with Caen, was represented in the rebellion
by Chaumont, its mayor, and Gardembas, a man of note. Buzot, Gorsas,
and Barbaroux at Caen, Brissot at Moulins, Chassan at Lyons,
Rabaut-Saint-Étienne at Nismes, Meillan and Duchâtel in Brittany, all
fanned the flames of the furnace. There were two Vendées,--the great
army fighting in the forests, and the smaller one carrying on the war
in the bushes. And this marks the difference between Charette and Jean
Chouan. The little Vendée was simple-minded and true; the great Vendée
was corrupt. The little Vendée was the better of the two. The rank of
Marquis, lieutenant-general of the king's armies, was bestowed upon
Charette, and he received the grand cross of Saint-Louis. Jean Chouan
remained Jean Chouan. Charette resembles a bandit, Jean Chouan is more
like a paladin of old.

As to those magnanimous chiefs, Bonchamps, Lescure, La Rochejaquelein,
they were mistaken; the great Catholic army was an insane attempt,
upon whose heels disaster was sure to follow; imagine a crowd of
peasants storming Paris, a coalition of villages besieging the
Pantheon, a chorus of Christmas hymns and prayers striving to drown the
Marseillaise, a cohort of rustics rushing upon a legion of enlightened
minds. Mans and Savenay chastised this folly. The Vendée could not
cross the Loire; that was a stride beyond its power. Civil war can
make no conquests. Crossing the Rhine confirms the power of Cæsar and
adds to that of Napoleon; crossing the Loire kills La Rochejaquelein.
The genuine Vendée is the Vendée at home: there it is more than
invulnerable; it is unconquerable. At home the Vendée is smuggler,
laborer, soldier, shepherd, poacher, sharpshooter, goat-herd,
bell-ringer, peasant, spy, assassin, sacristan, and wild beast.

La Rochejaquelein is only an Achilles, while Jean Chouan is a Proteus.

The Vendée failed. Other revolts have been successful, that in
Switzerland for instance. The difference between mountain insurgents
like the Swiss and forest insurgents like the Vendean, exists in the
fact that almost invariably, owing to some fatal influence of his
surroundings, the former fights for an ideal, while the latter fights
for a prejudice. The one soars, the other crawls. The one fights for
humanity, the other for solitude; the one demands liberty, the other
isolation; the one defends the commune, the other the parish. "The
Commons! The Commons!" cried the heroes of Morat. The one has to do
with precipices, the other with quagmires; the one is the man of
torrents and foaming streams, the other of stagnant pools whence fever
rises; one has the blue sky above his head, the other a thicket; one is
on the mountain-top, the other among the shadows.

An education that is gained upon the heights is quite a different
affair from that of the shallows.

A mountain is a fortress; a forest is an ambush; the former inspires
courage, the latter teaches trickery. The ancients placed their gods
upon a pinnacle, and their satyrs within copses. The satyr is a savage,
half man, half beast. Free countries have their Apennines, Alps,
Pyrenees, an Olympus. Parnassus is a mountain. Mont Blanc was the
gigantic auxiliary of William Tell. Looking beyond and above those
titanic contests between human intellect and the darkness of night,
which form the subjects of the poems of India, one sees Himalaya
towering overhead. Greece, Spain, Italy, Helvetia have the mountains
for their inspiration. Cimmeria, whether it be Germany or Brittany, has
but the woods. The forest tends to barbarism.

The formation of the soil influences man in many of his actions. It
is more of an accomplice than one might imagine. When we consider
certain wild scenery, we feel tempted to exonerate man and accuse
Nature; we are conscious of an occult provocation on the part of
Nature; the desert has sometimes an unwholesome influence upon the
conscience, especially on one that is not enlightened. A conscience
may be gigantic,--take for example Socrates or the Christ; it may be
dwarf-like, in which case we find Atreus and Judas. A narrow conscience
soon displays the attributes of the reptile; it delights to haunt the
dim forests, it is attracted by the brambles, the thorns, the marshes
underneath the branches, and absorbs the evil influences of the place.
Optical illusions, mysterious mirages, the terrors of the hour and the
place, inspire a man with that sort of half-religious, half-animal
fear which in every-day life begets superstition, and in times of wild
excitements degenerates into brutality. Hallucination holds the torch
that lights the path to murder. A vertigo seizes the brigand. Nature,
marvellous as she is, holds a double meaning that dazzles great minds
and blinds the savage soul. When man is ignorant, and the desert is
alive with visions, the gloom of solitude is added to the blindness
of the intelligence; hence the abyss that sometimes yawns in the human
soul. There are certain rocks, ravines, copses, weird spaces between
the trees, revealing the blackness of the night, that incite man to
mad and cruel deeds. One might say that the evil fiend possesses such
spots. What tragic scenes has not the gloomy hill between Baignon and
Plélan beheld!

Wide horizons tend to enlarge the mind; limited horizons, on the
contrary, circumscribe it; hence men naturally kind-hearted, such, for
instance, as Jean Chouan, grow narrow-minded.

It is the hatred of narrow minds for liberal ideas that fetters the
march of progress. The Vendean war, a quarrel between the local and the
universal idea, the contest of peasant and patriot, may be summed up in
two words,--the village community and the fatherland.