_How the Stranger vainly endeavoured to reveal to me in words the
mysteries of Spaceland._


As soon as the sound of my Wife's retreating footsteps had died away, I
began to approach the Stranger with the intention of taking a nearer view
and of bidding him be seated: but his appearance struck me dumb and
motionless with astonishment. Without the slightest symptoms of
angularity he nevertheless varied every instant with gradations of size
and brightness scarcely possible for any Figure within the scope of my
experience. The thought flashed across me that I might have before me a
burglar or cut-throat, some monstrous Irregular Isosceles, who, by
feigning the voice of a Circle, had obtained admission somehow into the
house, and was now preparing to stab me with his acute angle.

In a sitting-room, the absence of Fog (and the season happened to be
remarkably dry), made it difficult for me to trust to Sight Recognition,
especially at the short distance at which I was standing. Desperate with
fear, I rushed forward with an unceremonious "You must permit me, Sir—"
and felt him. My Wife was right. There was not the trace of an angle, not
the slightest roughness or inequality: never in my life had I met with a
more perfect Circle. He remained motionless while I walked round him,
beginning from his eye and returning to it again. Circular he was
throughout, a perfectly satisfactory Circle; there could not be a doubt
of it. Then followed a dialogue, which I will endeavour to set down as
near as I can recollect it, omitting only some of my profuse
apologies—for I was covered with shame and humiliation that I, a Square,
should have been guilty of the impertinence of feeling a Circle. It was
commenced by the Stranger with some impatience at the lengthiness of my
introductory process.

_Stranger._ Have you felt me enough by this time? Are you not introduced
to me yet?

_I._ Most illustrious Sir, excuse my awkwardness, which arises not from
ignorance of the usages of polite society, but from a little surprise and
nervousness, consequent on this somewhat unexpected visit. And I beseech
you to reveal my indiscretion to no one, and especially not to my Wife.
But before your Lordship enters into further communications, would he
deign to satisfy the curiosity of one who would gladly know whence his
Visitor came?

_Stranger._ From Space, from Space, Sir: whence else?

_I._ Pardon me, my Lord, but is not your Lordship already in Space, your
Lordship and his humble servant, even at this moment?

_Stranger._ Pooh! what do you know of Space? Define Space.

_I._ Space, my Lord, is height and breadth indefinitely prolonged.

_Stranger._ Exactly: you see you do not even know what Space is. You
think it is of Two Dimensions only; but I have come to announce to you a
Third—height, breadth, and length.

_I._ Your Lordship is pleased to be merry. We also speak of length and
height, or breadth and thickness, thus denoting Two Dimensions by four
names.

_Stranger._ But I mean not only three names, but Three Dimensions.

_I._ Would your Lordship indicate or explain to me in what direction is
the Third Dimension, unknown to me?

_Stranger._ I came from it. It is up above and down below.

_I._ My Lord means seemingly that it is Northward and Southward.

_Stranger._ I mean nothing of the kind. I mean a direction in which you
cannot look, because you have no eye in your side.

_I._ Pardon me, my Lord, a moment's inspection will convince your
Lordship that I have a perfect luminary at the juncture of two of my
sides.

_Stranger._ Yes: but in order to see into Space you ought to have an eye,
not on your Perimeter, but on your side, that is, on what you would
probably call your inside; but we in Spaceland should call it your side.

_I._ An eye in my inside! An eye in my stomach! Your Lordship jests.

_Stranger._ I am in no jesting humour. I tell you that I come from Space,
or, since you will not understand what Space means, from the Land of
Three Dimensions whence I but lately looked down upon your Plane which
you call Space forsooth. From that position of advantage I discerned all
that you speak of as _solid_ (by which you mean "enclosed on four
sides"), your houses, your churches, your very chests and safes, yes even
your insides and stomachs, all lying open and exposed to my view.

_I._ Such assertions are easily made, my Lord.

_Stranger._ But not easily proved, you mean. But I mean to prove mine.

When I descended here, I saw your four Sons, the Pentagons, each in his
apartment, and your two Grandsons the Hexagons; I saw your youngest
Hexagon remain a while with you and then retire to his room, leaving you
and your Wife alone. I saw your Isosceles servants, three in number, in
the kitchen at supper, and the little Page in the scullery. Then I came
here, and how do you think I came?

_I._ Through the roof, I suppose.

_Stranger._ Not so. Your roof, as you know very well, has been recently
repaired, and has no aperture by which even a Woman could penetrate. I
tell you I come from Space. Are you not convinced by what I have told you
of your children and household.

_I._ Your Lordship must be aware that such facts touching the belongings
of his humble servant might be easily ascertained by any one in the
neighbourhood possessing your Lordship's ample means of obtaining
information.

_Stranger._ How shall I convince him? Surely a plain statement of facts
followed by ocular demonstration ought to suffice.—Now, Sir; listen to
me.

You are living on a Plane. What you style Flatland is the vast level
surface of what I may call a fluid, on, or in, the top of which you and
your countrymen move about, without rising above it or falling below it.

I am not a plane Figure, but a Solid. You call me a Circle; but in
reality I am not a Circle, but an infinite number of Circles, of size
varying from a Point to a Circle of thirteen inches in diameter, one
placed on the top of the other. When I cut through your plane as I am now
doing, I make in your plane a section which you, very rightly, call a
Circle. For even a Sphere—which is my proper name in my own country—if he
manifest himself at all to an inhabitant of Flatland—must needs manifest
himself as a Circle.

Do you not remember—for I, who see all things, discerned last night the
phantasmal vision of Lineland written upon your brain—do you not
remember, I say, how, when you entered the realm of Lineland, you were
compelled to manifest yourself to the King not as a Square, but as a
Line, because that Linear Realm had not Dimensions enough to represent
the whole of you, but only a slice or section of you? In precisely the
same way, your country of Two Dimensions is not spacious enough to
represent me, a being of Three, but can only exhibit a slice or section
of me, which is what you call a Circle.

The diminished brightness of your eye indicates incredulity. But now
prepare to receive proof positive of the truth of my assertions. You
cannot indeed see more than one of my sections, or Circles, at a time;
for you have no power to raise your eye out of the plane of Flatland; but
you can at least see that, as I rise in Space, so my section becomes
smaller. See now, I will rise; and the effect upon your eye will be that
my Circle will become smaller and smaller till it dwindles to a point and
finally vanishes.

There was no "rising" that I could see; but he diminished and finally
vanished. I winked once or twice to make sure that I was not dreaming.
But it was no dream. For from the depths of nowhere came forth a hollow
voice—close to my heart it seemed—"Am I quite gone? Are you convinced
now? Well, now I will gradually return to Flatland, and you shall see my
section become larger and larger."

Every reader in Spaceland will easily understand that my mysterious Guest
was speaking the language of truth and even of simplicity. But to me,
proficient though I was in Flatland Mathematics, it was by no means a
simple matter. The rough diagram given above will make it clear to any
Spaceland child that the Sphere, ascending in the three positions
indicated there, must needs have manifested himself to me, or to any
Flatlander, as a Circle, at first of full size, then small, and at last
very small indeed, approaching to a Point. But to me, although I saw the
facts before me, the causes were as dark as ever. All that I could
comprehend was, that the Circle had made himself smaller and vanished,
and that he had now reappeared and was rapidly making himself larger.

When he had regained his original size, he heaved a deep sigh; for he
perceived by my silence that I had altogether failed to comprehend him.
And indeed I was now inclining to the belief that he must be no Circle at
all, but some extremely clever juggler; or else that the old wives' tales
were true, and that after all there were such people as Enchanters and
Magicians.

After a long pause he muttered to himself, "One resource alone remains,
if I am not to resort to action. I must try the method of Analogy." Then
followed a still longer silence, after which he continued our dialogue.

_Sphere._ Tell me, Mr. Mathematician; if a Point moves Northward, and
leaves a luminous wake, what name would you give to the wake?

_I._ A straight Line.

_Sphere._ And a straight Line has how many extremities?

_I._ Two.

_Sphere._ Now conceive the Northward straight line moving parallel to
itself, East and West, so that every point in it leaves behind it the
wake of a straight Line. What name will you give to the Figure thereby
formed? We will suppose that it moves through a distance equal to the
original straight Line.—What name, I say?

_I._ A Square.

_Sphere._ And how many sides has a Square? And how many Angles?

_I._ Four sides and four angles.

_Sphere._ Now stretch your imagination a little, and conceive a Square in
Flatland, moving parallel to itself upward.

_I._ What? Northward?

_Sphere._ No, not Northward; upward; out of Flatland altogether.

If it moved Northward, the Southern points in the Square would have to
move through the positions previously occupied by the Northern points.
But that is not my meaning.

I mean that every Point in you—for you are a Square and will serve the
purpose of my illustration—every Point in you, that is to say in what you
call your inside, is to pass upwards through Space in such a way that no
Point shall pass through the position previously occupied by any other
Point; but each Point shall describe a straight Line of its own. This is
all in accordance with Analogy; surely it must be clear to you.

Restraining my impatience—for I was now under a strong temptation to rush
blindly at my Visitor and to precipitate him into Space, or out of
Flatland, anywhere, so that I could get rid of him—I replied:—

"And what may be the nature of the Figure which I am to shape out by this
motion which you are pleased to denote by the word 'upward'? I presume it
is describable in the language of Flatland."

_Sphere._ Oh, certainly. It is all plain and simple, and in strict
accordance with Analogy—only, by the way, you must not speak of the
result as being a Figure, but as a Solid. But I will describe it to you.
Or rather not I, but Analogy. We began with a single Point, which of
course—being itself a Point—has only _one_ terminal Point.

One Point produces a Line with _two_ terminal Points.

One Line produces a Square with _four_ terminal Points.

Now you can yourself give the answer to your own question: 1, 2, 4, are
evidently in Geometrical Progression. What is the next number.

_I._ Eight.

_Sphere._ Exactly. The one Square produces a
_Something-which-you-do-not-as-yet-know-a-name-for-but-which-we-call-a-Cube_
with _eight_ terminal Points. Now are you convinced?

_I._ And has this Creature sides, as well as angles or what you call
"terminal Points?"

_Sphere._ Of course; and all according to Analogy. But, by the way, not
what _you_ call sides, but what _we_ call sides. You would call them
_solids_.

_I._ And how many solids or sides will appertain to this Being whom I am
to generate by the motion of my inside in an "upward" direction, and whom
you call a Cube?

_Sphere._ How can you ask? And you a mathematician! The side of anything
is always, if I may so say, one Dimension behind the thing. Consequently,
as there is no Dimension behind a Point, a Point has 0 sides; a Line, if
I may so say, has 2 sides (for the Points of a Line may be called by
courtesy, its sides); a Square has 4 sides; 0, 2, 4; what Progression do
you call that?

_I._ Arithmetical.

_Sphere._ And what is the next number?

_I._ Six.

_Sphere._ Exactly. Then you see you have answered your own question. The
Cube which you will generate will be bounded by six sides, that is to
say, six of your insides. You see it all now, eh?

"Monster," I shrieked, "be thou juggler, enchanter, dream, or devil, no
more will I endure thy mockeries. Either thou or I must perish." And
saying these words I precipitated myself upon him.