IN THE TWILIGHT.


If Sylvia needed another trial to make that hard week harder, it soon
came to her in the knowledge that Warwick watched her. She well knew
why, and vainly endeavored to conceal from him that which she had
succeeded in concealing entirely from others. But he possessed the key
to her variable moods; he alone knew that now painful forethought, not
caprice dictated many of her seeming whims, and ruled her simplest
action. To others she appeared busy, gay, and full of interest in all
about her; to him, the industry was a preventive of forbidden thoughts;
the gayety a daily endeavor to forget; the interest, an anxiety
concerning the looks and words of her companions, because she must guard
her own.

Sylvia felt something like terror in the presence of this penetrating
eye, this daring will, for the vigilance was unflagging and unobtrusive,
and with all her efforts she could not read his heart as she felt her
own was being read. Adam could act no part, but bent on learning the
truth for the sake of all, he surmounted the dangers of the situation by
no artifice, no rash indulgence, but by simply shunning solitary
interviews with Sylvia as carefully as the courtesy due his hostess
would allow. In walks and drives, and general conversation, he bore his
part, surprising and delighting those who knew him best by the genial
change which seemed to have softened his rugged nature. But the instant
the family group fell apart and Moor's devotion to his cousin left
Sylvia alone, Warwick was away into the wood or out upon the sea,
lingering there till some meal, some appointed pleasure, or the evening
lamp brought all together. Sylvia understood this, and loved him for it
even while she longed to have it otherwise. But Moor reproached him for
his desertion, doubly felt since the gentler acquirements made him
dearer to his friend. Hating all disguises, Warwick found it hard to
withhold the fact which was not his own to give, and sparing no blame to
himself, answered Moor's playful complaint with a sad sincerity that
freed him from all further pleadings.

"Geoffrey, I have a heavy heart which even you cannot heal. Leave it to
time, and let me come and go as of old, enjoying the social hour when I
may, flying to solitude when I must."

Much as Sylvia had longed to see these friends, she counted the hours of
their stay, for the presence of one was a daily disquieting, because
spirits would often flag, conversation fail, and an utter weariness
creep over her when she could least account for or yield to it. More
than once during that week she longed to lay her head on Faith's kind
bosom and ask help. Deep as was her husband's love it did not possess
the soothing power of a woman's sympathy, and though it cradled her as
tenderly as if she had been a child, Faith's compassion would have been
like motherly arms to fold and foster. But friendly as they soon became,
frank as was Faith's regard for Sylvia, earnest as was Sylvia's
affection for Faith, she never seemed to reach that deeper place where
she desired to be. Always when she thought she had found the innermost
that each of us seek for in our friend, she felt that Faith drew back,
and a reserve as delicate as inflexible barred her approach with chilly
gentleness. This seemed so foreign to Faith's nature that Sylvia
pondered and grieved over it till the belief came to her that this
woman, so truly excellent and loveworthy, did not desire to receive her
confidence, and sometimes a bitter fear assailed her that Warwick was
not the only reader of her secret trouble.

All things have an end, and the last day came none too soon for one
dweller under that hospitable roof. Faith refused all entreaties to
stay, and looked somewhat anxiously at Warwick as Moor turned from
herself to him with the same urgency.

"Adam, you will stay? Promise me another week?"

"I never promise, Geoffrey."

Believing that, as no denial came, his request was granted, Moor gave
his whole attention to Faith, who was to leave them in an hour.

"Sylvia, while I help our cousin to select and fasten up the books and
prints she likes to take with her, will you run down into the garden and
fill your prettiest basket with our finest grapes? You will like that
better than fumbling with folds and string; and you know one's servants
should not perform these pleasant services for one's best friends."

Glad to be away, Sylvia ran through the long grape walk to its sunniest
nook, and standing outside the arch, began to lay the purple clusters in
her basket. Only a moment was she there alone; Warwick's shadow,
lengthened by the declining sun, soon fell black along the path. He did
not see her, nor seem intent on following her; he walked slowly, hat in
hand, so slowly that he was but midway down the leafy lane when Faith's
voice arrested him. She was in haste, as her hurried step and almost
breathless words betrayed; and losing not an instant, she cried before
they met--

"Adam, you will come with me? I cannot leave you here."

"Do you doubt me, Faith?"

"No; but loving women are so weak."

"So strong, you mean; men are weakest when they love."

"Adam, _will_ you come?"

"I will follow you; I shall speak with Geoffrey first."

"Must you tell him so soon?"

"I must."

Faith's hand had been on Warwick's arm; as he spoke the last words she
bent her head upon it for an instant, then without another word turned
and hurried back as rapidly as she had come, while Warwick stood where
she left him, motionless as if buried in some absorbing thought.

All had passed in a moment, a moment too short, too full of intense
surprise to leave Sylvia time for recollection and betrayal of her
presence. Half hidden and wholly unobserved she had seen the unwonted
agitation of Faith's countenance and manner, had heard Warwick's softly
spoken answers to those eager appeals, and with a great pang had
discovered that some tender confidence existed between these two of
which she had never dreamed. Sudden as the discovery was its acceptance
and belief; for, knowing her own weakness, Sylvia found something like
relief in the hope that a new happiness for Warwick had ended all
temptation, and in time perhaps all pain for herself. Impulsive as ever
she leaned upon the seeming truth, and making of the fancy a fact,
passed into a perfect passion of self-abnegation, thinking, in the brief
pause that followed Faith's departure--

"This is the change we see in him; this made him watch me, hoping I had
forgotten, as I once said and believed. I should be glad, I will be
glad, and let him see that even while I suffer I can rejoice in that
which helps us both."

Full of her generous purpose, yet half doubtful how to execute it,
Sylvia stepped from the recess where she had stood, and slowly passed
toward Warwick, apparently intent on settling her fruity burden as she
went. At the first sound of her light step on the gravel he turned,
feeling at once that she must have heard, and eager to learn what
significance that short dialogue possessed for her. Only a hasty glance
did she give him as she came, but it showed him flushed cheeks, excited
eyes, and lips a little tremulous as they said--

"These are for Faith; will you hold the basket while I cover it with
leaves?"

He took it, and as the first green covering was deftly laid, he asked,
below his breath--

"Sylvia, did you hear us?"

To his unutterable amazement she looked up clearly, and all her heart
was in her voice, as she answered with a fervency he could not doubt--

"Yes; and I was glad to hear, to know that a nobler woman filled the
place I cannot fill. Oh, believe it, Adam; and be sure that the
knowledge of your great content will lighten the terrible regret which
you have seen as nothing else ever could have done."

Down fell the basket at their feet, and taking her face between his
hands, Warwick bent and searched with a glance that seemed to penetrate
to her heart's core. For a moment she struggled to escape, but the grasp
that held her was immovable. She tried to oppose a steadfast front and
baffle that perilous inspection, but quick and deep rushed the
traitorous color over cheek and forehead with its mute betrayal. She
tried to turn her eyes away, but those other eyes, dark and dilated with
intensity of purpose, fixed her own, and the confronting countenance
wore an expression which made its familiar features look awfully large
and grand to her panic-stricken sight. A sense of utter helplessness
fell on her, courage deserted her, pride changed to fear, defiance to
despair; as the flush faded, the fugitive glance was arrested and the
upturned face became a pale blank, ready to receive the answer that
strong scrutiny was slowly bringing to the light, as invisible
characters start out upon a page when fire passes over them. Neither
spoke, but soon through all opposing barriers the magnetism of an
indomitable will drew forth the truth, set free the captive passion pent
so long, and wrung from those reluctant lineaments a full confession of
that power which heaven has gifted with eternal youth.

The instant this assurance was his own beyond a doubt, Warwick released
her, snatched up his hat, and hurrying down the path vanished in the
wood. Spent as with an hour's excitement, and bewildered by emotions
which she could no longer master, Sylvia lingered in the grape walk till
her husband called her. Then hastily refilling her basket, she shook her
hair about her face and went to bid Faith good by. Moor was to accompany
her to the city, and they left early, that Faith might pause for adieux
to Mark and Prudence.

"Where is Adam? Has he gone before, or been inveigled into staying?"

Moor spoke to Sylvia, but busied in fastening the basket-lid, she seemed
not to hear, and Faith replied for her.

"He will take a later boat, we need not wait for him."

When Faith embraced Sylvia, all the coldness had melted from her manner,
and her voice was tender as a mother's as she whispered low in her ear--

"Dear child, if ever you need any help that Geoffrey cannot give,
remember cousin Faith."

For two hours Sylvia sat alone, not idle, for in the first real solitude
she had enjoyed for seven days she looked deeply into herself, and
putting by all disguises owned the truth, and resolved to repair the
past if possible, as Faith had counselled in the case which she had now
made her own. Like so many of us, Sylvia often saw her errors too late
to avoid committing them, and failing to do the right thing at the right
moment, kept herself forever in arrears with that creditor who must
inevitably be satisfied. She had been coming to this decision all that
weary week, and these quiet hours left her both resolute and resigned.

As she sat there while the early twilight began to gather, her eye often
turned to Warwick's travelling bag, which Faith, having espied it ready
in his chamber, had brought down and laid in the library, as a reminder
of her wish. As she looked at it, Sylvia's heart yearned toward it in
the fond, foolish way which women have of endowing the possessions of
those they love with the attractions of sentient things, and a portion
of their owner's character or claim upon themselves. It was like
Warwick, simple and strong, no key, and every mark of the long use which
had tested its capabilities and proved them durable. A pair of gloves
lay beside it on the chair, and though she longed to touch anything of
his, she resisted the temptation till, pausing near them in one of her
journeys to the window, she saw a rent in the glove that lay
uppermost,--that appeal was irresistible,--"Poor Adam! there has been no
one to care for him so long, and Faith does not yet know how; surely I
may perform so small a service for him if he never knows how tenderly I
do it?"

Standing ready to drop her work at a sound, Sylvia snatched a brief
satisfaction which solaced her more than an hour of idle lamentation,
and as she kissed the glove with a long, sad kiss, and put it down with
eyes that dimly saw where it should be, perhaps there went as much real
love and sorrow into that little act as ever glorified some greater
deed. Then she went to lie in the "Refuge," as she had named an ancient
chair, with her head on its embracing arm. Not weeping, but quietly
watching the flicker of the fire, which filled the room with warm
duskiness, making the twilight doubly pleasant, till a sudden blaze
leaped up, showing her that her watch was over and Warwick come. She had
not heard him enter, but there he was close before her, his face glowing
with the frosty air, his eye clear and kind, and in his aspect that
nameless charm which won for him the confidence of whosoever read his
countenance. Scarce knowing why, Sylvia felt reassured that all was
well, and looked up with more welcome in her heart than she dared betray
in words.

"Come at last! where have you been so long, Adam?"

"Round the Island I suspect, for I lost my way, and had no guide but
instinct to lead me home again. I like to say that word, for though it
is not home it seems so to me now. May I sit here before I go, and warm
myself at your fire, Sylvia?"

Sure of his answer he established himself on the stool at her feet,
stretched his hands to the grateful blaze, and went on with some inward
resolution lending its power and depth to his voice.

"I had a question to settle with myself and went to find my best
counsellors in the wood. Often when I am harassed by some perplexity or
doubt to which I can find no wise or welcome answer, I walk myself into
a belief that it will come; then it appears. I stoop to break a handsome
flower, to pick up a cone, or watch some little creature happier than I,
and there lies my answer, like a good luck penny, ready to my hand."

"Faith has gone, but Geoffrey hopes to keep you for another week," said
Sylvia, ignoring the unsafe topic.

"Shall he have his wish?"

"Faith expects you to follow her."

"And you think I ought?"

"I think you will."

"When does the next boat leave?"

"An hour hence."

"I'll wait for it here. Did I wake you coming in?"

"I was not asleep; only lazy, warm, and quiet."

"And deadly tired;--dear soul, how can it be otherwise, leading the life
you lead."

There was such compassion in his voice, such affection in his eye, such
fostering kindliness in the touch of the hand he laid upon her own, that
Sylvia cried within herself,--"Oh, if Geoffrey would only come!" and
hoping for that help to save her from herself, she hastily replied--

"You are mistaken, Adam,--my life is easier than I deserve,--my husband
makes me very--"

"Miserable,--the truth to me, Sylvia."

Warwick rose as he spoke, closed the door and came back wearing an
expression which caused her to start up with a gesture of entreaty--

"No no, I will not hear you! Adam, you must not speak!"

He paused opposite her, leaving a little space between them, which he
did not cross through all that followed, and with that look, inflexible
yet pitiful, he answered steadily--

"I _must_ speak and you _will_ hear me. But understand me, Sylvia, I
desire and design no French sentiment nor sin like that we heard of, and
what I say now I would say if Geoffrey stood between us. I have settled
this point after long thought and the heartiest prayers I ever prayed;
and much as I have at stake, I speak more for your sake than my own.
Therefore do not entreat nor delay, but listen and let me show you the
wrong you are doing yourself, your husband, and your friend."

"Does Faith know all the past? does she desire you to do this that her
happiness may be secure?" demanded Sylvia.

"Faith is no more to me, nor I to Faith, than the friendliest regard can
make us. She suspected that I loved you long ago; she now believes that
you love me; she pities her cousin tenderly, but will not meddle with
the tangle we have made of our three lives. Forget that folly, and let
me speak to you as I should. When we parted I thought that you loved
Geoffrey; so did you. When I came here I was sure of it for a day; but
on that second night I saw your face as you stood here alone, and then I
knew what I have since assured myself of. God knows, I think my gain
dearly purchased by his loss. I see your double trial; I know the
tribulations in store for all of us; yet, as an honest man, I must speak
out, because you ought not to delude yourself or Geoffrey another day."

"What right have you to come between us and decide my duty, Adam?"
Sylvia spoke passionately, roused to resistance by his manner and the
turmoil of emotions warring within her.

"The right of a sane man to save the woman he loves from destroying her
own peace forever, and undermining the confidence of the friend dearest
to them both. I know this is not the world's way in such matters; but I
care not; because I believe one human creature has a right to speak to
another in times like these as if they two stood alone. I will not
command, I will appeal to you, and if you are the candid soul I think
you, your own words shall prove the truth of what I say. Sylvia, do you
love your husband?"

"Yes, Adam, dearly."

"More than you love me?"

"I wish I did! I wish I did!"

"Are you happy with him?"

"I was till you came; I shall be when you are gone."

"Never! It is impossible to go back to the blind tranquillity you once
enjoyed. Now a single duty lies before you; delay is weak, deceit is
wicked; utter sincerity alone can help us. Tell Geoffrey all; then,
whether you live your life alone, or one day come to me, there is no
false dealing to repent of, and looking the hard fact in the face robs
it of one half its terrors. Will you do this, Sylvia?"

"No, Adam. Remember what he said that night: 'I love but few, and those
few are my world,'--I am chief in that world; shall I destroy it, for my
selfish pleasure? He waited for me very long, is waiting still; can I
for a second time disappoint the patient heart that would find it
easier to give up life than the poor possession which I am? No, I ought
not, dare not do it yet."

"If you dare not speak the truth to your friend, you do not deserve him,
and the name is a lie. You ask me to remember what he said that
night,--I ask you to recall the look with which he begged you not to try
him too hardly. Put it to yourself,--which is the kinder justice, a full
confession now, or a late one hereafter, when longer subterfuge has made
it harder for you to offer, bitterer for him to receive? I tell you,
Sylvia, it were more merciful to murder him outright than to slowly wear
away his faith, his peace, and love by a vain endeavor to perform as a
duty what should be your sweetest pleasure, and what will soon become a
burden heavier than you can bear."

"You do not see as I see; you cannot understand what I am to him, nor
can I tell you what he is to me. It is not as if I could dislike or
despise him for any unworthiness of his own; nor as if he were a lover
only. Then I could do much which now is worse than impossible, for I
have married him, and it is too late."

"Oh, Sylvia! why could you not have waited?"

"Why? because I am what I am, too easily led by circumstances, too
entirely possessed by whatever hope, belief, or fear rules me for the
hour. Give me a steadfast nature like your own and I will be as strong.
I know I am weak, but I am not wilfully wicked; and when I ask you to be
silent, it is because I want to save him from the pain of doubt, and try
to teach myself to love him as I should. I must have time, but I can
bear much and endeavor more persistently than you believe. If I forgot
you once, can I not again? and should I not? I am all in all to him,
while you, so strong, so self-reliant, can do without my love as you
have done till now, and will soon outlive your sorrow for the loss of
that which might have made us happy had I been more patient."

"Yes, I shall outlive it, else I should have little faith in myself. But
I shall not forget; and if you would remain forever what you now are to
me, you will so act that nothing may mar this memory, if it is to be no
more. I doubt your power to forget an affection which has survived so
many changes and withstood assaults such as Geoffrey must unconsciously
have made upon it. But I have no right to condemn your beliefs, to order
your actions, or force you to accept my code of morals if you are not
ready for it. You must decide, but do not again deceive yourself, and
through whatever comes hold fast to that which is better worth
preserving than husband, happiness, or friend."

His words fell cold on Sylvia's ear, for with the inconsistency of a
woman's heart she thought he gave her up too readily, yet honored him
more truly for sacrificing both himself and her to the principle that
ruled his life and made him what he was. His seeming resignation
steadied her, for now he waited her decision, while before he was only
bent on executing the purpose wherein he believed salvation lay. She
girded up her strength, collected her thoughts, and tried to show him
what she believed to be her duty.

"Let me tell you how it is with me, Adam, and be patient if I am not
wise and brave like you, but far too young, too ignorant to bear such
troubles well. I am not leaning on my own judgment now, but on Faith's,
and though you do not love her as I hoped, you feel she is one to trust.
She said the wife, in that fictitious case which was so real to us, the
wife should leave no effort unmade, no self-denial unexacted, till she
had fairly proved that she could not be what she had promised. Then, and
then only, had she a right to undo the tie that had bound her. I must do
this before I think of your love or my own, for on my marriage morning I
made a vow within myself that Geoffrey's happiness should be the first
duty of my life. I shall keep that vow as sacredly as I will those I
made before the world, until I find that it is utterly beyond my power,
then I will break all together."

"You have tried that once, and failed."

"No, I have never tried it as I shall now. At first, I did not know the
truth, then I was afraid to believe, and struggled blindly to forget.
Now I see clearly, I confess it, I resolve to conquer it, and I will not
yield until I have done my best. You say you must respect me. Could you
do so if I no longer respected myself? I should not, if I forgot all
Geoffrey had borne and done for me, and could not bear and do this thing
for him. I must make the effort, and make it silently; for he is very
proud with all his gentleness, and would reject the seeming sacrifice
though he would make one doubly hard for love of me. If I am to stay
with him, it spares him the bitterest pain he could suffer; if I am to
go, it gives him a few more months of happiness, and I may so prepare
him that the parting will be less hard. How others would act I cannot
tell, I only know that this seems right to me; and I must fight my fight
alone, even if I die in doing it."

She was so earnest, yet so humble; so weak in all but the desire to do
well; so young to be tormented with such fateful issues, and withal so
steadfast in the grateful yet remorseful tenderness she bore her
husband, that though sorely disappointed and not one whit convinced,
Warwick could only submit to this woman-hearted child, and love her
with redoubled love, both for what she was and what she aspired to be.

"Sylvia, what would you have me do?"

"You must go away, and for a long time, Adam; because when you are near
me my will is swayed by yours, and what you desire I long to give you.
Go quite away, and through Faith you may learn whether I succeed or
fail. It is hard to say this, yet you know it is a truer hospitality in
me to send you from my door than to detain and offer you temptation for
your daily bread."

How strangely Ottila came back to him, and all the scenes he had passed
through with her!--a perilous contrast just then. Yet, despite his pride
in the loving little creature who put him from her that she might be
worthy of him, one irrepressible lament swelled his heart and passed his
lips--

"Ah, Sylvia! I thought that parting on the mountain was the hardest I
could ever know, but this is harder; for now I have but to say come to
me, and you would come."

But the bitter moment had its drop of honey, whose sweetness nourished
him when all else failed. Sylvia answered with a perfect confidence in
that integrity which even her own longing could not bribe--

"Yes, Adam, but you will not say it, because feeling as I feel, you know
I must not come to you."

He did know it, and confessed his submission by folding fast the arms
half opened for her, and standing dumb with the words trembling on his
lips. It was the bravest action of a life full of real valor, for the
sacrifice was not made with more than human fortitude. The man's heart
clamored for its right, patience was weary, hope despaired, and all
natural instincts mutinied against the command that bound them. But no
grain of virtue ever falls wasted to the ground; it drops back upon its
giver a regathered strength, and cannot fail of its reward in some
kindred soul's approval, imitation, or delight. It was so then, as
Sylvia went to him; for though she did not touch nor smile upon him, he
felt her nearness; and the parting assured him that its power bound them
closer than the happiest union. In her face there shone a look half
fervent, half devout, and her voice had no falter in it now.

"You show me what I should be. All my life I have desired strength of
heart and stability of soul; may I not hope to earn for myself a little
of the integrity I love in you? If courage, self-denial, and self-help,
make you what you are, can I have a more effectual guide? You say you
shall outlive this passion; why should not I imitate your brave example,
and find the consolations you shall find? Oh, Adam, let me try."

"You shall."

"Then go; go now, while I can say it as I should."

"The good Lord bless and help you, Sylvia."

She gave him both her hands, but though he only pressed them silently,
that pressure nearly destroyed the victory she had won, for the strong
grasp snapped the slender guard-ring Moor had given her a week ago. She
heard it drop with a golden tinkle on the hearth, saw the dark oval,
with its doubly significant character, roll into the ashes, and felt
Warwick's hold tighten as if he echoed the emphatic word uttered when
the ineffectual gift was first bestowed. Superstition flowed in Sylvia's
blood, and was as unconquerable as the imagination which supplied its
food. This omen startled her. It seemed a forewarning that endeavor
would be vain, that submission was wisdom, and that the husband's charm
had lost its virtue when the stronger power claimed her. The desire to
resist began to waver as the old passionate longing sprang up more
eloquent than ever; she felt the rush of a coming impulse, knew that it
would sweep her into Warwick's arms, there to forget her duty, to
forfeit his respect. With the last effort of a sorely tried spirit she
tore her hands away, fled up to the room which had never needed lock or
key till now, and stifling the sound of those departing steps among the
cushions of the little couch where she had wept away childish woes and
dreamed girlish dreams, she struggled with the great sorrow of her too
early womanhood, uttering with broken voice that petition oftenest
quoted from the one prayer which expresses all our needs--

"Lead me not into temptation, but deliver me from evil."