MOTHER OLDERSHAW ON HER GUARD.


1. _From Mrs. Oldershaw (Diana Street, Pimlico) to Miss Gwilt (West
Place, Old Brompton)_.

"Ladies' Toilet Repository, June 20th,

"Eight in the Evening.

"MY DEAR LYDIA--About three hours have passed, as well as I can
remember, since I pushed you unceremoniously inside my house in West
Place, and, merely telling you to wait till you saw me again, banged
the door to between us, and left you alone in the hall. I know your
sensitive nature, my dear, and I am afraid you have made up your mind
by this time that never yet was a guest treated so abominably by her
hostess as I have treated you.

"The delay that has prevented me from explaining my strange conduct
is, believe me, a delay for which I am not to blame. One of the many
delicate little difficulties which beset so essentially confidential
a business as mine occurred here (as I have since discovered) while
we were taking the air this afternoon in Kensington Gardens. I see no
chance of being able to get back to you for some hours to come, and I
have a word of very urgent caution for your private ear, which has been
too long delayed already. So I must use the spare minutes as they come,
and write.

"Here is caution the first. On no account venture outside the door again
this evening, and be very careful, while the daylight lasts, not to
show yourself at any of the front windows. I have reason to fear that
a certain charming person now staying with me may possibly be watched.
Don't be alarmed, and don't be impatient; you shall know why.

"I can only explain myself by going back to our unlucky meeting in the
Gardens with that reverend gentleman who was so obliging as to follow us
both back to my house.

"It crossed my mind, just as we were close to the door, that there
might be a motive for the parson's anxiety to trace us home, far less
creditable to his taste, and far more dangerous to both of us, than
the motive you supposed him to have. In plainer words, Lydia, I rather
doubted whether you had met with another admirer; and I strongly
suspected that you had encountered another enemy instead. There was
no time to tell you this. There was only time to see you safe into the
house, and to make sure of the parson (in case my suspicions were right)
by treating him as he had treated us; I mean, by following him in his
turn.

"I kept some little distance behind him at first, to turn the thing over
in my mind, and to be satisfied that my doubts were not misleading me.
We have no concealments from each other; and you shall know what my
doubts were.

"I was not surprised at _your_ recognizing _him_; he is not at all
a common-looking old man; and you had seen him twice in
Somersetshire--once when you asked your way of him to Mrs. Armadale's
house, and once when you saw him again on your way back to the railroad.
But I was a little puzzled (considering that you had your veil down
on both those occasions, and your veil down also when we were in the
Gardens) at his recognizing _you_. I doubted his remembering your figure
in a summer dress after he had only seen it in a winter dress; and
though we were talking when he met us, and your voice is one among your
many charms, I doubted his remembering your voice, either. And yet
I felt persuaded that he knew you. 'How?' you will ask. My dear, as
ill-luck would have it, we were speaking at the time of young Armadale.
I firmly believe that the name was the first thing that struck him; and
when he heard _that_, your voice certainly and your figure perhaps,
came back to his memory. 'And what if it did?' you may say. Think again,
Lydia, and tell me whether the parson of the place where Mrs. Armadale
lived was not likely to be Mrs. Armadale's friend? If he _was_ her
friend, the very first person to whom she would apply for advice
after the manner in which you frightened her, and after what you most
injudiciously said on the subject of appealing to her son, would be the
clergyman of the parish--and the magistrate, too, as the landlord at the
inn himself told you.

"You will now understand why I left you in that extremely uncivil
manner, and I may go on to what happened next.

"I followed the old gentleman till he turned into a quiet street,
and then accosted him, with respect for the Church written (I flatter
myself) in every line of my face.

"'Will you excuse me,' I said, 'if I venture to inquire, sir, whether
you recognized the lady who was walking with me when you happened to
pass us in the Gardens?'

"'Will you excuse my asking, ma'am, why you put that question?' was all
the answer I got.

"'I will endeavor to tell you, sir,' I said. 'If my friend is not an
absolute stranger to you, I should wish to request your attention to a
very delicate subject, connected with a lady deceased, and with her son
who survives her.'

"He was staggered; I could see that. But he was sly enough at the same
time to hold his tongue and wait till I said something more.

"'If I am wrong, sir, in thinking that you recognized my friend,' I went
on, 'I beg to apologize. But I could hardly suppose it possible that a
gentleman in your profession would follow a lady home who was a total
stranger to him.'

"There I had him. He colored up (fancy that, at his age!), and owned the
truth, in defense of his own precious character.

"'I have met with the lady once before, and I acknowledge that I
recognized her in the Gardens,' he said. 'You will excuse me if I
decline entering into the question of whether I did or did not purposely
follow her home. If you wish to be assured that your friend is not an
absolute stranger to me, you now have that assurance; and if you have
anything particular to say to me, I leave you to decide whether the time
has come to say it.'

"He waited, and looked about. I waited, and looked about. He said the
street was hardly a fit place to speak of a delicate subject in. I said
the street was hardly a fit place to speak of a delicate subject in. He
didn't offer to take me to where he lived. I didn't offer to take him
to where I lived. Have you ever seen two strange cats, my dear, nose to
nose on the tiles? If you have, you have seen the parson and me done to
the life.

"'Well, ma'am,' he said, at last, 'shall we go on with our conversation
in spite of circumstances?'

"'Yes, sir,' I said; 'we are both of us, fortunately, of an age to set
circumstances at defiance' (I had seen the old wretch looking at my gray
hair, and satisfying himself that his character was safe if he _was_
seen with me).

"After all this snapping and snarling, we came to the point at last. I
began by telling him that I feared his interest in you was not of the
friendly sort. He admitted that much--of course, in defense of his own
character once more. I next repeated to him everything you had told me
about your proceedings in Somersetshire, when we first found that he was
following us home. Don't be alarmed my dear--I was acting on principle.
If you want to make a dish of lies digestible, always give it a garnish
of truth. Well, having appealed to the reverend gentleman's confidence
in this matter, I next declared that you had become an altered woman
since he had seen you last. I revived that dead wretch, your husband
(without mentioning names, of course), established him (the first place
I thought of) in business at the Brazils, and described a letter which
he had written, offering to forgive his erring wife, if she would repent
and go back to him. I assured the parson that your husband's noble
conduct had softened your obdurate nature; and then, thinking I had
produced the right impression, I came boldly to close quarters with him.
I said, 'At the very time when you met us, sir, my unhappy friend was
speaking in terms of touching, self-reproach of her conduct to the late
Mrs. Armadale. She confided to me her anxiety to make some atonement,
if possible, to Mrs. Armadale's son; and it is at her entreaty (for she
cannot prevail on herself to face you) that I now beg to inquire whether
Mr. Armadale is still in Somersetshire, and whether he would consent
to take back in small installments the sum of money which my friend
acknowledges that she received by practicing on Mrs. Armadale's fears.'
Those were my very words. A neater story (accounting so nicely for
everything) was never told; it was a story to melt a stone. But this
Somersetshire parson is harder than stone itself. I blush for _him_,
my dear, when I assure you that he was evidently insensible enough to
disbelieve every word I said about your reformed character, your husband
in the Brazils, and your penitent anxiety to pay the money back. It is
really a disgrace that such a man should be in the Church; such
cunning as his is in the last degree unbecoming in a member of a sacred
profession.

"'Does your friend propose to join her husband by the next steamer?' was
all he condescended to say, when I had done.

"I acknowledge I was angry. I snapped at him. I said, 'Yes, she does.'

"'How am I to communicate with her?' he asked.

"I snapped at him again. 'By letter--through me.'

"'At what address, ma'am?'

"There, I had him once more. 'You have found my address out for
yourself, sir,' I said. 'The directory will tell you my name, if you
wish to find that out for yourself also; otherwise, you are welcome to
my card.'

"'Many thanks, ma'am. If your friend wishes to communicate with Mr.
Armadale, I will give you _my_ card in return.'

"'Thank you, sir.'

"'Thank you, ma'am.'

"'Good-afternoon, sir.'

"'Good-afternoon, ma'am.'

"So we parted. I went my way to an appointment at my place of business,
and he went his in a hurry; which is of itself suspicious. What I can't
get over is his heartlessness. Heaven help the people who send for _him_
to comfort them on their death-beds!

"The next consideration is, What are we to do? If we don't find out the
right way to keep this old wretch in the dark, he may be the ruin of us
at Thorpe Ambrose just as we are within easy reach of our end in view.
Wait up till I come to you, with my mind free, I hope, from the other
difficulty which is worrying me here. Was there ever such ill luck as
ours? Only think of that man deserting his congregation, and coming
to London just at the very time when we have answered Major Milroy's
advertisement, and may expect the inquiries to be made next week! I have
no patience with him; his bishop ought to interfere.

"Affectionately yours,

"MARIA OLDERSHAW."

2. _From Miss Gwilt to Mrs. Oldershaw_.

"West Place, June 20th.

"MY POOR OLD DEAR--How very little you know of my sensitive nature, as
you call it! Instead of feeling offended when you left me, I went to
your piano, and forgot all about you till your messenger came. Your
letter is irresistible; I have been laughing over it till I am quite
out of breath. Of all the absurd stories I ever read, the story you
addressed to the Somersetshire clergyman is the most ridiculous. And as
for your interview with him in the street, it is a perfect sin to keep
it to ourselves. The public ought really to enjoy it in the form of a
farce at one of the theaters.

"Luckily for both of us (to come to serious matters), your messenger is
a prudent person. He sent upstairs to know if there was an answer.
In the midst of my merriment I had presence of mind enough to send
downstairs and say 'Yes.'

"Some brute of a man says, in some book which I once read, that no woman
can keep two separate trains of ideas in her mind at the same time. I
declare you have almost satisfied me that the man is right. What! when
you have escaped unnoticed to your place of business, and when you
suspect this house to be watched, you propose to come back here, and
to put it in the parson's power to recover the lost trace of you! What
madness! Stop where you are; and when you have got over your difficulty
at Pimlico (it is some woman's business, of course; what worries women
are!), be so good as to read what I have got to say about our difficulty
at Brompton.

"In the first place, the house (as you supposed) is watched.

"Half an hour after you left me, loud voices in the street interrupted
me at the piano, and I went to the window. There was a cab at the house
opposite, where they let lodgings; and an old man, who looked like a
respectable servant, was wrangling with the driver about his fare. An
elderly gentleman came out of the house, and stopped them. An elderly
gentleman returned into the house, and appeared cautiously at the front
drawing-room window. You know him, you worthy creature; he had the bad
taste, some few hours since, to doubt whether you were telling him
the truth. Don't be afraid, he didn't see me. When he looked up, after
settling with the cab driver, I was behind the curtain. I have been
behind the curtain once or twice since; and I have seen enough to
satisfy me that he and his servant will relieve each other at the
window, so as never to lose sight of your house here, night or day. That
the parson suspects the real truth is of course impossible. But that
he firmly believes I mean some mischief to young Armadale, and that you
have entirely confirmed him in that conviction, is as plain as that two
and two make four. And this has happened (as you helplessly remind me)
just when we have answered the advertisement, and when we may expect the
major's inquiries to be made in a few days' time.

"Surely, here is a terrible situation for two women to find themselves
in? A fiddlestick's end for the situation! We have got an easy way out
of it--thanks, Mother Oldershaw, to what I myself forced you to do, not
three hours before the Somersetshire clergyman met with us.

"Has that venomous little quarrel of ours this morning--after we had
pounced on the major's advertisement in the newspaper--quite slipped out
of your memory? Have you forgotten how I persisted in my opinion that
you were a great deal too well known in London to appear safely as my
reference in your own name, or to receive an inquiring lady or gentleman
(as you were rash enough to propose) in your own house? Don't you
remember what a passion you were in when I brought our dispute to an end
by declining to stir a step in the matter, unless I could conclude my
application to Major Milroy by referring him to an address at which you
were totally unknown, and to a name which might be anything you pleased,
as long as it was not yours? What a look you gave me when you found
there was nothing for it but to drop the whole speculation or to let
me have my own way! How you fumed over the lodging hunting on the other
side of the Park! and how you groaned when you came back, possessed of
furnished apartments in respectable Bayswater, over the useless expense
I had put you to!

"What do you think of those furnished apartments _now_, you obstinate
old woman? Here we are, with discovery threatening us at our very door,
and with no hope of escape unless we can contrive to disappear from the
parson in the dark. And there are the lodgings in Bayswater, to which no
inquisitive strangers have traced either you or me, ready and waiting
to swallow us up--the lodgings in which we can escape all further
molestation, and answer the major's inquiries at our ease. Can you see,
at last, a little further than your poor old nose? Is there anything in
the world to prevent your safe disappearance from Pimlico to-night,
and your safe establishment at the new lodgings, in the character of
my respectable reference, half an hour afterward? Oh, fie, fie, Mother
Oldershaw! Go down on your wicked old knees, and thank your stars that
you had a she-devil like me to deal with this morning!

"Suppose we come now to the only difficulty worth mentioning--_my_
difficulty. Watched as I am in this house, how am I to join you without
bringing the parson or the parson's servant with me at my heels?

"Being to all intents and purposes a prisoner here, it seems to me that
I have no choice but to try the old prison plan of escape: a change of
clothes. I have been looking at your house-maid. Except that we are both
light, her face and hair and my face and hair are as unlike each other
as possible. But she is as nearly as can be my height and size; and (if
she only knew how to dress herself, and had smaller feet) her figure is
a very much better one than it ought to be for a person in her station
in life.

"My idea is to dress her in the clothes I wore in the Gardens to-day;
to send her out, with our reverend enemy in full pursuit of her; and, as
soon as the coast is clear, to slip away myself and join you. The thing
would be quite impossible, of course, if I had been seen with my veil
up; but, as events have turned out, it is one advantage of the horrible
exposure which followed my marriage that I seldom show myself in public,
and never, of course, in such a populous place as London, without
wearing a thick veil and keeping that veil down. If the house-maid wears
my dress, I don't really see why the house-maid may not be counted on to
represent me to the life.

"The one question is, Can the woman be trusted? If she can, send me a
line, telling her, on your authority, that she is to place herself at my
disposal. I won't say a word till I have heard from you first.

"Let me have my answer to-night. As long as we were only talking about
my getting the governess's place, I was careless enough how it ended.
But now that we have actually answered Major Milroy's advertisement, I
am in earnest at last. I mean to be Mrs. Armadale of Thorpe Ambrose; and
woe to the man or woman who tries to stop me! Yours,

"LYDIA GWILT.

"P.S.--I open my letter again to say that you need have no fear of your
messenger being followed on his return to Pimlico. He will drive to a
public-house where he is known, will dismiss the cab at the door, and
will go out again by a back way which is only used by the landlord and
his friends.--L. G."

3. _From Mrs. Oldershaw to Miss Gwilt_.

"Diana Street, 10 o'clock.

"MY DEAR LYDIA--You have written me a heartless letter. If you had been
in my trying position, harassed as I was when I wrote to you, I should
have made allowances for my friend when I found my friend not so sharp
as usual. But the vice of the present age is a want of consideration
for persons in the decline of life. Morally speaking, you are in a sad
state, my dear; and you stand much in need of a good example. You shall
have a good example--I forgive you.

"Having now relieved my mind by the performance of a good action,
suppose I show you next (though I protest against the vulgarity of the
expression) that I _can_ see a little further than my poor old nose?

"I will answer your question about the house-maid first. You may trust
her implicitly. She has had her troubles, and has learned discretion.
She also looks your age; though it is only her due to say that, in
this particular, she has some years the advantage of you. I inclose the
necessary directions which will place her entirely at your disposal.

"And what comes next?

"Your plan for joining me at Bayswater comes next. It is very well
as far as it goes; but it stands sadly in need of a little judicious
improvement. There is a serious necessity (you shall know why presently)
for deceiving the parson far more completely than you propose to deceive
him. I want him to see the house-maid's face under circumstances
which will persuade him that it is _your_ face. And then, going a
step further, I want him to see the house-maid leave London, under
the impression that he has seen _you_ start on the first stage of
your journey to the Brazils. He didn't believe in that journey when I
announced it to him this afternoon in the street. He may believe in it
yet, if you follow the directions I am now going to give you.

"To-morrow is Saturday. Send the housemaid out in your walking dress of
to-day, just as you propose; but don't stir out yourself, and don't go
near the window. Desire the woman to keep her veil down, to take half an
hour's walk (quite unconscious, of course, of the parson or his servant
at her heels), and then to come back to you. As soon as she appears,
send her instantly to the open window, instructing her to lift her veil
carelessly and look out. Let her go away again after a minute or two,
take off her bonnet and shawl, and then appear once more at the window,
or, better still, in the balcony outside. She may show herself again
occasionally (not too often) later in the day. And to-morrow--as we have
a professional gentleman to deal with--by all means send her to church.
If these proceedings don't persuade the parson that the house-maid's
face is your face, and if they don't make him readier to believe in your
reformed character than he was when I spoke to him, I have lived sixty
years, my love, in this vale of tears to mighty little purpose.

"The next day is Monday. I have looked at the shipping advertisements,
and I find that a steamer leaves Liverpool for the Brazils on Tuesday.
Nothing could be more convenient; we will start you on your voyage under
the parson's own eyes. You may manage it in this way:

"At one o'clock send out the man who cleans the knives and forks to get
a cab; and when he has brought it up to the door, let him go back and
get a second cab, which he is to wait in himself, round the corner, in
the square. Let the house-maid (still in your dress) drive off, with the
necessary boxes, in the first cab to the North-western Railway. When she
is gone, slip out yourself to the cab waiting round the corner, and come
to me at Bayswater. They may be prepared to follow the house-maid's cab,
because they have seen it at the door; but they won't be prepared to
follow your cab, because it has been hidden round the corner. When the
house-maid has got to the station, and has done her best to disappear
in the crowd (I have chosen the mixed train at 2:10, so as to give her
every chance), you will be safe with me; and whether they do or do not
find out that she does not really start for Liverpool won't matter by
that time. They will have lost all trace of you; and they may follow
the house-maid half over London, if they like. She has my instructions
(inclosed) to leave the empty boxes to find their way to the lost
luggage office and to go to her friends in the City, and stay there till
I write word that I want her again.

"And what is the object of all this?

"My dear Lydia, the object is your future security (and mine). We may
succeed or we may fail, in persuading the parson that you have actually
gone to the Brazils. If we succeed, we are relieved of all fear of him.
If we fail, he will warn young Armadale to be careful _of a woman like
my house-maid, and not of a woman like you_. This last gain is a very
important one; for we don't know that Mrs. Armadale may not have told
him your maiden name. In that event, the 'Miss Gwilt' whom he will
describe as having slipped through his fingers here will be so entirely
unlike the 'Miss Gwilt' established at Thorpe Ambrose, as to satisfy
everybody that it is not a case of similarity of persons, but only a
case of similarity of names.

"What do you say now to my improvement on your idea? Are my brains not
quite so addled as you thought them when you wrote? Don't suppose I'm at
all overboastful about my own ingenuity. Cleverer tricks than this trick
of mine are played off on the public by swindlers, and are recorded in
the newspapers every week. I only want to show you that my assistance is
not less necessary to the success of the Armadale speculation now than
it was when I made our first important discoveries, by means of the
harmless-looking young man and the private inquiry office in Shadyside
Place.

"There is nothing more to say that I know of, except that I am just
going to start for the new lodging, with a box directed in my new name.
The last expiring moments of Mother Oldershaw, of the Toilet Repository,
are close at hand, and the birth of Miss Gwilt's respectable reference,
Mrs. Mandeville, will take place in a cab in five minutes' time. I fancy
I must be still young at heart, for I am quite in love already with my
romantic name; it sounds almost as pretty as Mrs. Armadale of Thorpe
Ambrose, doesn't it?

"Good-night, my dear, and pleasant dreams. If any accident happens
between this and Monday, write to me instantly by post. If no accident
happens you will be with me in excellent time for the earliest inquiries
that the major can possibly make. My last words are, don't go out, and
don't venture near the front windows till Monday comes.

"Affectionately yours,

"M. O."