SHE KNOWS THE TRUTH.


1. _From Mr. Bashwood to Miss Gwilt_.

"Thorpe Ambrose, July 20th, 1851.

"DEAR MADAM--I received yesterday, by private messenger, your obliging
note, in which you direct me to communicate with you through the post
only, as long as there is reason to believe that any visitors who may
come to you are likely to be observed. May I be permitted to say that
I look forward with respectful anxiety to the time when I shall again
enjoy the only real happiness I have ever experienced--the happiness of
personally addressing you?

"In compliance with your desire that I should not allow this day (the
Sunday) to pass without privately noticing what went on at the great
house, I took the keys, and went this morning to the steward's office. I
accounted for my appearance to the servants by informing them that I had
work to do which it was important to complete in the shortest possible
time. The same excuse would have done for Mr. Armadale if we had met,
but no such meeting happened.

"Although I was at Thorpe Ambrose in what I thought good time, I was too
late to see or hear anything myself of a serious quarrel which appeared
to have taken place, just before I arrived, between Mr. Armadale and Mr.
Midwinter.

"All the little information I can give you in this matter is derived
from one of the servants. The man told me that he heard the voices of
the two gentlemen loud in Mr. Armadale's sitting-room. He went in to
announce breakfast shortly afterward, and found Mr. Midwinter in such
a dreadful state of agitation that he had to be helped out of the room.
The servant tried to take him upstairs to lie down and compose himself.
He declined, saying he would wait a little first in one of the lower
rooms, and begging that he might be left alone. The man had hardly got
downstairs again when he heard the front door opened and closed. He ran
back, and found that Mr. Midwinter was gone. The rain was pouring at the
time, and thunder and lightning came soon afterward. Dreadful weather
certainly to go out in. The servant thinks Mr. Midwinter's mind was
unsettled. I sincerely hope not. Mr. Midwinter is one of the few people
I have met with in the course of my life who have treated me kindly.

"Hearing that Mr. Armadale still remained in the sitting-room, I went
into the steward's office (which, as you may remember, is on the same
side of the house), and left the door ajar, and set the window open,
waiting and listening for anything that might happen. Dear madam, there
was a time when I might have thought such a position in the house of my
employer not a very becoming one. Let me hasten to assure you that this
is far from being my feeling now. I glory in any position which makes me
serviceable to you.

"The state of the weather seemed hopelessly adverse to that renewal
of intercourse between Mr. Armadale and Miss Milroy which you so
confidently anticipate, and of which you are so anxious to be made
aware. Strangely enough, however, it is actually in consequence of the
state of the weather that I am now in a position to give you the very
information you require. Mr. Armadale and Miss Milroy met about an hour
since. The circumstances were as follows:

"Just at the beginning of the thunder-storm, I saw one of the grooms run
across from the stables, and heard him tap at his master's window. Mr.
Armadale opened the window and asked what was the matter. The groom said
he came with a message from the coachman's wife. She had seen from her
room over the stables (which looks on to the park) Miss Milroy quite
alone, standing for shelter under one of the trees. As that part of the
park was at some distance from the major's cottage, she had thought
that her master might wish to send and ask the young lady into the
house--especially as she had placed herself, with a thunder-storm coming
on, in what might turn out to be a very dangerous position.

"The moment Mr. Armadale understood the man's message, he called for the
water-proof things and the umbrellas, and ran out himself, instead of
leaving it to the servants. In a little time he and the groom came back
with Miss Milroy between them, as well protected as could be from the
rain.

"I ascertained from one of the women-servants, who had taken the young
lady into a bedroom, and had supplied her with such dry things as she
wanted, that Miss Milroy had been afterward shown into the drawing-room,
and that Mr. Armadale was there with her. The only way of following your
instructions, and finding out what passed between them, was to go round
the house in the pelting rain, and get into the conservatory (which
opens into the drawing-room) by the outer door. I hesitate at nothing,
dear madam, in your service; I would cheerfully get wet every day, to
please you. Besides, though I may at first sight be thought rather an
elderly man, a wetting is of no very serious consequence to me. I assure
you I am not so old as I look, and I am of a stronger constitution than
appears.

"It was impossible for me to get near enough in the conservatory to see
what went on in the drawing-room, without the risk of being discovered.
But most of the conversation reached me, except when they dropped their
voices. This is the substance of what I heard:

"I gathered that Miss Milroy had been prevailed on, against her will, to
take refuge from the thunder-storm in Mr. Armadale's house. She said so,
at least, and she gave two reasons. The first was that her father had
forbidden all intercourse between the cottage and the great house. Mr.
Armadale met this objection by declaring that her father had issued his
orders under a total misconception of the truth, and by entreating her
not to treat him as cruelly as the major had treated him. He entered,
I suspect, into some explanations at this point, but as he dropped his
voice I am unable to say what they were. His language, when I did hear
it, was confused and ungrammatical. It seemed, however, to be quite
intelligible enough to persuade Miss Milroy that her father had been
acting under a mistaken impression of the circumstances. At least, I
infer this; for, when I next heard the conversation, the young lady was
driven back to her second objection to being in the house--which was,
that Mr. Armadale had behaved very badly to her, and that he richly
deserved that she should never speak to him again.

"In this latter case, Mr. Armadale attempted no defense of any kind. He
agreed with her that he had behaved badly; he agreed with her that he
richly deserved she should never speak to him again. At the same time he
implored her to remember that he had suffered his punishment already.
He was disgraced in the neighborhood; and his dearest friend, his one
intimate friend in the world, had that very morning turned against him
like the rest. Far or near, there was not a living creature whom he was
fond of to comfort him, or to say a friendly word to him. He was lonely
and miserable, and his heart ached for a little kindness--and that was
his only excuse for asking Miss Milroy to forget and forgive the past.

"I must leave you, I fear, to judge for yourself of the effect of this
on the young lady; for, though I tried hard, I failed to catch what
she said. I am almost certain I heard her crying, and Mr. Armadale
entreating her not to break his heart. They whispered a great deal,
which aggravated me. I was afterward alarmed by Mr. Armadale coming
out into the conservatory to pick some flowers. He did not come as far,
fortunately, as the place where I was hidden; and he went in again
into the drawing-room, and there was more talking (I suspect at close
quarters), which to my great regret I again failed to catch. Pray
forgive me for having so little to tell you. I can only add that, when
the storm cleared off, Miss Milroy went away with the flowers in her
hand, and with Mr. Armadale escorting her from the house. My own humble
opinion is that he had a powerful friend at court, all through the
interview, in the young lady's own liking for him.

"This is all I can say at present, with the exception of one other thing
I heard, which I blush to mention. But your word is law, and you have
ordered me to have no concealments from you.

"Their talk turned once, dear madam, on yourself. I think I heard the
word 'creature' from Miss Milroy; and I am certain that Mr. Armadale,
while acknowledging that he had once admired you, added that
circumstances had since satisfied him of 'his folly.' I quote his own
expression; it made me quite tremble with indignation. If I may be
permitted to say so, the man who admires Miss Gwilt lives in Paradise.
Respect, if nothing else, ought to have closed Mr. Armadale's lips.
He is my employer, I know; but after his calling it an act of folly to
admire you (though I _am_ his deputy-steward), I utterly despise him.

"Trusting that I may have been so happy as to give you satisfaction
thus far, and earnestly desirous to deserve the honor of your continued
confidence in me, I remain, dear madam,

"Your grateful and devoted servant,

"FELIX BASHWOOD."

2. _From Mrs. Oldershaw to Miss Gwilt_.

"Diana Street, Monday, July 21st.

"MY DEAR LYDIA--I trouble you with a few lines. They are written under a
sense of the duty which I owe to myself, in our present position toward
each other.

"I am not at all satisfied with the tone of your last two letters; and I
am still less pleased at your leaving me this morning without any letter
at all--and this when we had arranged, in the doubtful state of our
prospects, that I was to hear from you every day. I can only interpret
your conduct in one way. I can only infer that matters at Thorpe
Ambrose, having been all mismanaged, are all going wrong.

"It is not my present object to reproach you, for why should I waste
time, language, and paper? I merely wish to recall to your memory
certain considerations which you appear to be disposed to overlook.
Shall I put them in the plainest English? Yes; for, with all my faults,
I am frankness personified.

"In the first place, then, I have an interest in your becoming Mrs.
Armadale of Thorpe Ambrose as well as you. Secondly, I have provided you
(to say nothing of good advice) with all the money needed to accomplish
our object. Thirdly, I hold your notes of hand, at short dates, for
every farthing so advanced. Fourthly and lastly, though I am indulgent
to a fault in the capacity of a friend--in the capacity of a woman of
business, my dear, I am not to be trifled with. That is all, Lydia, at
least for the present.

"Pray don't suppose I write in anger; I am only sorry and disheartened.
My state of mind resembles David's. If I had the wings of a dove, I
would flee away and be at rest.

"Affectionately yours, MARIA OLDERSHAW."

3. _From Mr. Bashwood to Miss Gwilt_.

"Thorpe Ambrose, July 21st.

"DEAR MADAM--You will probably receive these lines a few hours after
my yesterday's communication reaches you. I posted my first letter last
night, and I shall post this before noon to-day.

"My present object in writing is to give you some more news from
this house. I have the inexpressible happiness of announcing that Mr.
Armadale's disgraceful intrusion on your privacy is at an end. The watch
set on your actions is to be withdrawn this day. I write, dear madam,
with the tears in my eyes--tears of joy, caused by feelings which I
ventured to express in my previous letter (see first paragraph toward
the end). Pardon me this personal reference. I can speak to you (I don't
know why) so much more readily with my pen than with my tongue.

"Let me try to compose myself, and proceed with my narrative.

"I had just arrived at the steward's office this morning, when Mr.
Pedgift the elder followed me to the great house to see Mr. Armadale by
special appointment. It is needless to say that I at once suspended
any little business there was to do, feeling that your interests might
possibly be concerned. It is also most gratifying to add that this time
circumstances favored me. I was able to stand under the open window and
to hear the whole interview.

"Mr. Armadale explained himself at once in the plainest terms. He
gave orders that the person who had been hired to watch you should be
instantly dismissed. On being asked to explain this sudden change of
purpose, he did not conceal that it was owing to the effect produced
on his mind by what had passed between Mr. Midwinter and himself on the
previous day. Mr. Midwinter's language, cruelly unjust as it was, had
nevertheless convinced him that no necessity whatever could excuse any
proceeding so essentially base in itself as the employment of a spy, and
on that conviction he was now determined to act.

"But for your own positive directions to me to conceal nothing that
passes here in which your name is concerned, I should really be ashamed
to report what Mr. Pedgift said on his side. He has behaved kindly to
me, I know. But if he was my own brother, I could never forgive him the
tone in which he spoke of you, and the obstinacy with which he tried to
make Mr. Armadale change his mind.

"He began by attacking Mr. Midwinter. He declared that Mr. Midwinter's
opinion was the very worst opinion that could be taken; for it was quite
plain that you, dear madam, had twisted him round your finger. Producing
no effect by this coarse suggestion (which nobody who knows you could
for a moment believe), Mr. Pedgift next referred to Miss Milroy, and
asked Mr. Armadale if he had given up all idea of protecting her. What
this meant I cannot imagine. I can only report it for your private
consideration. Mr. Armadale briefly answered that he had his own plan
for protecting Miss Milroy, and that the circumstances were altered in
that quarter, or words to a similar effect. Still Mr. Pedgift persisted.
He went on (I blush to mention) from bad to worse. He tried to persuade
Mr. Armadale next to bring an action at law against one or other of
the persons who had been most strongly condemning his conduct in the
neighborhood, for the purpose--I really hardly know how to write it--of
getting you into the witness-box. And worse yet: when Mr. Armadale still
said No, Mr. Pedgift, after having, as I suspected by the sound of his
voice, been on the point of leaving the room, artfully came back, and
proposed sending for a detective officer from London, simply to look at
you. 'The whole of this mystery about Miss Gwilt's true character,' he
said, 'may turn on a question of identity. It won't cost much to have
a man down from London; and it's worth trying whether her face is or is
not known at headquarters to the police.' I again and again assure you,
dearest lady, that I only repeat those abominable words from a sense of
duty toward yourself. I shook--I declare I shook from head to foot when
I heard them.

"To resume, for there is more to tell you.

"Mr. Armadale (to his credit--I don't deny it, though I don't like him)
still said No. He appeared to be getting irritated under Mr. Pedgift's
persistence, and he spoke in a somewhat hasty way. 'You persuaded me on
the last occasion when we talked about this,' he said, 'to do something
that I have been since heartily ashamed of. You won't succeed in
persuading me, Mr. Pedgift, a second time.' Those were his words. Mr.
Pedgift took him up short; Mr. Pedgift seemed to be nettled on his side.

"'If that is the light in which you see my advice, sir,' he said, 'the
less you have of it for the future, the better. Your character and
position are publicly involved in this matter between yourself and Miss
Gwilt; and you persist, at a most critical moment, in taking a course of
your own, which I believe will end badly. After what I have already said
and done in this very serious case, I can't consent to go on with it
with both my hands tied, and I can't drop it with credit to myself while
I remain publicly known as your solicitor. You leave me no alternative,
sir, but to resign the honor of acting as your legal adviser.' 'I
am sorry to hear it,' says Mr. Armadale, 'but I have suffered enough
already through interfering with Miss Gwilt. I can't and won't stir any
further in the matter.' '_You_ may not stir any further in it, sir,'
says Mr. Pedgift, 'and _I_ shall not stir any further in it, for it
has ceased to be a question of professional interest to me. But mark my
words, Mr. Armadale, you are not at the end of this business yet. Some
other person's curiosity may go on from the point where you (and I) have
stopped; and some other person's hand may let the broad daylight in yet
on Miss Gwilt.'

"I report their language, dear madam, almost word for word, I believe,
as I heard it. It produced an indescribable impression on me; it filled
me, I hardly know why, with quite a panic of alarm. I don't at all
understand it, and I understand still less what happened immediately
afterward.

"Mr. Pedgift's voice, when he said those last words, sounded dreadfully
close to me. He must have been speaking at the open window, and he must,
I fear, have seen me under it. I had time, before he left the house,
to get out quietly from among the laurels, but not to get back to the
office. Accordingly I walked away along the drive toward the lodge, as
if I was going on some errand connected with the steward's business.

"Before long, Mr. Pedgift overtook me in his gig, and stopped. 'So _you_
feel some curiosity about Miss Gwilt, do you?' he said. 'Gratify your
curiosity by all means; _I_ don't object to it.' I felt naturally
nervous, but I managed to ask him what he meant. He didn't answer; he
only looked down at me from the gig in a very odd manner, and laughed.
'I have known stranger things happen even than _that_!' he said to
himself suddenly, and drove off.

"I have ventured to trouble you with this last incident, though it
may seem of no importance in your eyes, in the hope that your superior
ability may be able to explain it. My own poor faculties, I confess, are
quite unable to penetrate Mr. Pedgift's meaning. All I know is that he
has no right to accuse me of any such impertinent feeling as curiosity
in relation to a lady whom I ardently esteem and admire. I dare not put
it in warmer words.

"I have only to add that I am in a position to be of continued service
to you here if you wish it. Mr. Armadale has just been into the office,
and has told me briefly that, in Mr. Midwinter's continued absence, I am
still to act as steward's deputy till further notice.

"Believe me, dear madam, anxiously and devotedly yours, FELIX BASHWOOD."

4. _From Allan Armadale to the Reverend Decimus Brock_.

Thorpe Ambrose, Tuesday.

"MY DEAR MR. BROCK--I am in sad trouble. Midwinter has quarreled with
me and left me; and my lawyer has quarreled with me and left me; and
(except dear little Miss Milroy, who has forgiven me) all the neighbors
have turned their backs on me. There is a good deal about 'me' in this,
but I can't help it. I am very miserable alone in my own house. Do pray
come and see me! You are the only old friend I have left, and I do long
so to tell you about it.

"N. B.--On my word of honor as a gentleman, I am not to blame. Yours
affectionately,

"ALLAN ARMADALE.

"P. S.--I would come to you (for this place is grown quite hateful to
me), but I have a reason for not going too far away from Miss Milroy
just at present."

5. _From Robert Stapleton to Allan Armadale, Esq._

"Bascombe Rectory, Thursday Morning.

"RESPECTED SIR--I see a letter in your writing, on the table along with
the others, which I am sorry to say my master is not well enough to
open. He is down with a sort of low fever. The doctor says it has been
brought on with worry and anxiety which master was not strong enough to
bear. This seems likely; for I was with him when he went to London last
month, and what with his own business, and the business of looking after
that person who afterward gave us the slip, he was worried and anxious
all the time; and for the matter of that, so was I.

"My master was talking of you a day or two since. He seemed unwilling
that you should know of his illness, unless he got worse. But I think
you ought to know of it. At the same time he is not worse; perhaps
a trifle better. The doctor says he must be kept very quiet, and not
agitated on any account. So be pleased to take no notice of this--I mean
in the way of coming to the rectory. I have the doctor's orders to say
it is not needful, and it would only upset my master in the state he is
in now.

"I will write again if you wish it. Please accept of my duty, and
believe me to remain, sir, your humble servant,

"ROBERT STAPLETON.

"P. S.--The yacht has been rigged and repainted, waiting your orders.
She looks beautiful."

6. _From Mrs. Oldershaw to Miss Gwilt_.

"Diana Street, July 24th.

"MISS GWILT--The post hour has passed for three mornings following,
and has brought me no answer to my letter. Are you purposely bent on
insulting me? or have you left Thorpe Ambrose? In either case, I won't
put up with your conduct any longer. The law shall bring you to book, if
I can't.

"Your first note of hand (for thirty pounds) falls due on Tuesday next,
the 29th. If you had behaved with common consideration toward me, I
would have let you renew it with pleasure. As things are, I shall have
the note presented; and, if it is not paid, I shall instruct my man of
business to take the usual course.

"Yours, MARIA OLDERSHAW."


7. _From Miss Gwilt to Mrs. Oldershaw_.

"5 Paradise Place, Thorpe Ambrose, July 25th.

"MRS. OLDERSHAW--The time of your man of business being, no doubt, of
some value, I write a line to assist him when he takes the usual course.
He will find me waiting to be arrested in the first-floor apartments,
at the above address. In my present situation, and with my present
thoughts, the best service you can possibly render me is to lock me up.

"L. G."

8. _From Mrs. Oldershaw to Miss Gwilt_.

"Diana Street, July 26th.

"MY DARLING LYDIA--The longer I live in this wicked world the more
plainly I see that women's own tempers are the worst enemies women have
to contend with. What a truly regretful style of correspondence we have
fallen into! What a sad want of self-restraint, my dear, on your side
and on mine!

"Let me, as the oldest in years, be the first to make the needful
excuses, the first to blush for my own want of self-control. Your cruel
neglect, Lydia, stung me into writing as I did. I am so sensitive to
ill treatment, when it is inflicted on me by a person whom I love and
admire; and, though turned sixty, I am still (unfortunately for myself)
so young at heart. Accept my apologies for having made use of my
pen, when I ought to have been content to take refuge in my
pocket-handkerchief. Forgive your attached Maria for being still young
at heart!

"But oh, my dear--though I own I threatened you--how hard of you to take
me at my word! How cruel of you, if your debt had been ten times what
it is, to suppose me capable (whatever I might say) of the odious
inhumanity of arresting my bosom friend! Heavens! have I deserved to
be taken at my word in this unmercifully exact way, after the years of
tender intimacy that have united us? But I don't complain; I only mourn
over the frailty of our common human nature. Let us expect as little of
each other as possible, my dear; we are both women, and we can't help
it. I declare, when I reflect on the origin of our unfortunate sex--when
I remember that we were all originally made of no better material than
the rib of a man (and that rib of so little importance to its possessor
that he never appears to have missed it afterward), I am quite
astonished at our virtues, and not in the least surprised at our faults.

"I am wandering a little; I am losing myself in serious thought, like
that sweet character in Shakespeare who was 'fancy free.' One last word,
dearest, to say that my longing for an answer to this proceeds entirely
from my wish to hear from you again in your old friendly tone, and
is quite unconnected with any curiosity to know what you are doing at
Thorpe Ambrose--except such curiosity as you yourself might approve.
Need I add that I beg you as a favor to _me_ to renew, on the customary
terms? I refer to the little bill due on Tuesday next, and I venture to
suggest that day six weeks.

"Yours, with a truly motherly feeling,

"MARIA OLDERSHAW."

9. _From Miss Gwilt to Mrs. Oldershaw_.

"Paradise Place, July 27th.

"I have just got your last letter. The brazen impudence of it has roused
me. I am to be treated like a child, am I?--to be threatened first, and
then, if threatening fails, to be coaxed afterward? You _shall_ coax me;
you shall know, my motherly friend, the sort of child you have to deal
with.

"I had a reason, Mrs. Oldershaw, for the silence which has so seriously
offended you. I was afraid--actually afraid--to let you into the secret
of my thoughts. No such fear troubles me now. My only anxiety this
morning is to make you my best acknowledgments for the manner in which
you have written to me. After carefully considering it, I think the
worst turn I can possibly do you is to tell you what you are burning to
know. So here I am at my desk, bent on telling it. If you don't bitterly
repent, when you are at the end of this letter, not having held to your
first resolution, and locked me up out of harm's way while you had the
chance, my name is not Lydia Gwilt.

"Where did my last letter end? I don't remember, and don't care. Make it
out as you can--I am not going back any further than this day week. That
is to say, Sunday last.

"There was a thunder-storm in the morning. It began to clear off toward
noon. I didn't go out: I waited to see Midwinter or to hear from him.
(Are you surprised at my not writing 'Mr.' before his name? We have got
so familiar, my dear, that 'Mr.' would be quite out of place.) He had
left me the evening before, under very interesting circumstances. I had
told him that his friend Armadale was persecuting me by means of a hired
spy. He had declined to believe it, and had gone straight to Thorpe
Ambrose to clear the thing up. I let him kiss my hand before he went. He
promised to come back the next day (the Sunday). I felt I had secured my
influence over him; and I believed he would keep his word.

"Well, the thunder passed away as I told you. The weather cleared up;
the people walked out in their best clothes; the dinners came in from
the bakers; I sat dreaming at my wretched little hired piano, nicely
dressed and looking my best--and still no Midwinter appeared. It was
late in the afternoon, and I was beginning to feel offended, when a
letter was brought to me. It had been left by a strange messenger
who went away again immediately. I looked at the letter. Midwinter at
last--in writing, instead of in person. I began to feel more offended
than ever; for, as I told you, I thought I had used my influence over
him to better purpose.

"The letter, when I read it, set my mind off in a new direction. It
surprised, it puzzled, it interested me. I thought, and thought, and
thought of him, all the rest of the day.

"He began by asking my pardon for having doubted what I told him. Mr.
Armadale's own lips had confirmed me. They had quarreled (as I had
anticipated they would); and he, and the man who had once been
his dearest friend on earth, had parted forever. So far, I was not
surprised. I was amused by his telling me in his extravagant way that he
and his friend were parted forever; and I rather wondered what he would
think when I carried out my plan, and found my way into the great house
on pretense of reconciling them.

"But the second part of the letter set me thinking. Here it is, in his
own words.

"'It is only by struggling against myself (and no language can say how
hard the struggle has been) that I have decided on writing, instead of
speaking to you. A merciless necessity claims my future life. I must
leave Thorpe Ambrose, I must leave England, without hesitating, without
stopping to look back. There are reasons--terrible reasons, which I have
madly trifled with--for my never letting Mr. Armadale set eyes on me, or
hear of me again, after what has happened between us. I must go, never
more to live under the same roof, never more to breathe the same air
with that man. I must hide myself from him under an assumed name; I
must put the mountains and the seas between us. I have been warned as
no human creature was ever warned before. I believe--I dare not tell you
why--I believe that, if the fascination you have for me draws me back to
you, fatal consequences will come of it to the man whose life has been
so strangely mingled with your life and mine--the man who was once
_your_ admirer and _my_ friend. And yet, feeling this, seeing it in my
mind as plainly as I see the sky above my head, there is a weakness in
me that still shrinks from the one imperative sacrifice of never seeing
you again. I am fighting with it as a man fights with the strength of
his despair. I have been near enough, not an hour since, to see the
house where you live, and have forced myself away again out of sight
of it. Can I force myself away further still, now that my letter is
written--now, when the useless confession escapes me, and I own to
loving you with the first love I have ever known, with the last love
I shall ever feel? Let the coming time answer the question; I dare not
write of it or think of it more.'


"Those were the last words. In that strange way the letter ended.

"I felt a perfect fever of curiosity to know what he meant. His loving
me, of course, was easy enough to understand. But what did he mean by
saying he had been warned? Why was he never to live under the same roof,
never to breathe the same air again, with young Armadale? What sort of
quarrel could it be which obliged one man to hide himself from another
under an assumed name, and to put the mountains and the seas between
them? Above all, if he came back, and let me fascinate him, why should
it be fatal to the hateful lout who possesses the noble fortune and
lives in the great house?

"I never longed in my life as I longed to see him again and put these
questions to him. I got quite superstitious about it as the day drew on.
They gave me a sweet-bread and a cherry pudding for dinner. I actually
tried if he would come back by the stones in the plate! He will, he
won't, he will, he won't--and so on. It ended in 'He won't.' I rang
the bell, and had the things taken away. I contradicted Destiny quite
fiercely. I said, 'He will!' and I waited at home for him.

"You don't know what a pleasure it is to me to give you all these little
particulars. Count up--my bosom friend, my second mother--count up the
money you have advanced on the chance of my becoming Mrs. Armadale, and
then think of my feeling this breathless interest in another man. Oh,
Mrs. Oldershaw, how intensely I enjoy the luxury of irritating you!

"The day got on toward evening. I rang again, and sent down to borrow a
railway time-table. What trains were there to take him away on Sunday?
The national respect for the Sabbath stood my friend. There was only
one train, which had started hours before he wrote to me. I went and
consulted my glass. It paid me the compliment of contradicting
the divination by cherry-stones. My glass said: 'Get behind the
window-curtain; he won't pass the long lonely evening without coming
back again to look at the house.' I got behind the window-curtain, and
waited with his letter in my hand.

"The dismal Sunday light faded, and the dismal Sunday quietness in the
street grew quieter still. The dusk came, and I heard a step coming with
it in the silence. My heart gave a little jump--only think of my having
any heart left! I said to myself: 'Midwinter!' And Midwinter it was.

"When he came in sight he was walking slowly, stopping and hesitating at
every two or three steps. My ugly little drawing-room window seemed to
be beckoning him on in spite of himself. After waiting till I saw him
come to a standstill, a little aside from the house, but still within
view of my irresistible window, I put on my things and slipped out
by the back way into the garden. The landlord and his family were at
supper, and nobody saw me. I opened the door in the wall, and got
round by the lane into the street. At that awkward moment I suddenly
remembered, what I had forgotten before, the spy set to watch me, who
was, no doubt, waiting somewhere in sight of the house.

"It was necessary to get time to think, and it was (in my state of
mind) impossible to let Midwinter go without speaking to him. In great
difficulties you generally decide at once, if you decide at all. I
decided to make an appointment with him for the next evening, and to
consider in the interval how to manage the interview so that it might
escape observation. This, as I felt at the time, was leaving my own
curiosity free to torment me for four-and-twenty mortal hours; but what
other choice had I? It was as good as giving up being mistress of Thorpe
Ambrose altogether, to come to a private understanding with Midwinter in
the sight and possibly in the hearing of Armadale's spy.

"Finding an old letter of yours in my pocket, I drew back into the lane,
and wrote on the blank leaf, with the little pencil that hangs at my
watch-chain: 'I must and will speak to you. It is impossible to-night,
but be in the street to-morrow at this time, and leave me afterward
forever, if you like. When you have read this, overtake me, and say as
you pass, without stopping or looking round, "Yes, I promise."'

"I folded up the paper, and came on him suddenly from behind. As he
started and turned round, I put the note into his hand, pressed his
hand, and passed on. Before I had taken ten steps I heard him behind me.
I can't say he didn't look round--I saw his big black eyes, bright and
glittering in the dusk, devour me from head to foot in a moment;
but otherwise he did what I told him. 'I can deny you nothing,' he
whispered; 'I promise.' He went on and left me. I couldn't help thinking
at the time how that brute and booby Armadale would have spoiled
everything in the same situation.

"I tried hard all night to think of a way of making our interview of the
next evening safe from discovery, and tried in vain. Even as early
as this, I began to feel as if Midwinter's letter had, in some
unaccountable manner, stupefied me.

"Monday morning made matters worse. News came from my faithful ally,
Mr. Bashwood, that Miss Milroy and Armadale had met and become friends
again. You may fancy the state I was in! An hour or two later there came
more news from Mr. Bashwood--good news this time. The mischievous
idiot at Thorpe Ambrose had shown sense enough at last to be ashamed of
himself. He had decided on withdrawing the spy that very day, and he and
his lawyer had quarreled in consequence.

"So here was the obstacle which I was too stupid to remove for myself
obligingly removed for me! No more need to fret about the coming
interview with Midwinter; and plenty of time to consider my next
proceedings, now that Miss Milroy and her precious swain had come
together again. Would you believe it, the letter, or the man himself (I
don't know which), had taken such a hold on me that, though I tried and
tried, I could think of nothing else; and this when I had every reason
to fear that Miss Milroy was in a fair way of changing her name to
Armadale, and when I knew that my heavy debt of obligation to her was
not paid yet? Was there ever such perversity? I can't account for it;
can you?

"The dusk of the evening came at last. I looked out of the window--and
there he was!

"I joined him at once; the people of the house, as before, being too
much absorbed in their eating and drinking to notice anything else. 'We
mustn't be seen together here,' I whispered. 'I must go on first, and
you must follow me.'

"He said nothing in the way of reply. What was going on in his mind
I can't pretend to guess; but, after coming to his appointment, he
actually hung back as if he was half inclined to go away again.

"'You look as if you were afraid of me,' I said.

"'I _am_ afraid of you,' he answered--'of you, and of myself.'

"It was not encouraging; it was not complimentary. But I was in such
a frenzy of curiosity by this time that, if he had been ruder still, I
should have taken no notice of it. I led the way a few steps toward the
new buildings, and stopped and looked round after him.

"'Must I ask it of you as a favor,' I said, 'after your giving me your
promise, and after such a letter as you have written to me?'

"Something suddenly changed him; he was at my side in an instant. 'I beg
your pardon, Miss Gwilt; lead the way where you please.' He dropped back
a little after that answer, and I heard him say to himself, 'What _is_
to be _will_ be. What have I to do with it, and what has she?'

"It could hardly have been the words, for I didn't understand them--it
must have been the tone he spoke in, I suppose, that made me feel a
momentary tremor. I was half inclined, without the ghost of a reason for
it, to wish him good-night, and go in again. Not much like me, you will
say. Not much, indeed! It didn't last a moment. Your darling Lydia soon
came to her senses again.

"I led the way toward the unfinished cottages, and the country beyond.
It would have been much more to my taste to have had him into the house,
and have talked to him in the light of the candles. But I had risked it
once already; and in this scandal-mongering place, and in my critical
position, I was afraid to risk it again. The garden was not to be
thought of either, for the landlord smokes his pipe there after his
supper. There was no alternative but to take him away from the town.

"From time to time, I looked back as I went on. There he was, always at
the same distance, dim and ghost-like in the dusk, silently following
me.

"I must leave off for a little while. The church bells have broken out,
and the jangling of them drives me mad. In these days, when we have
all got watches and clocks, why are bells wanted to remind us when
the service begins? We don't require to be rung into the theater. How
excessively discreditable to the clergy to be obliged to ring us into
the church!"

----------

"They have rung the congregation in at last; and I can take up my pen,
and go on again.

"I was a little in doubt where to lead him to. The high-road was on one
side of me; but, empty as it looked, somebody might be passing when
we least expected it. The other way was through the coppice. I led him
through the coppice.

"At the outskirts of the trees, on the other side, there was a dip
in the ground with some felled timber lying on it, and a little
pool beyond, still and white and shining in the twilight. The long
grazing-grounds rose over its further shore, with the mist thickening on
them, and a dim black line far away of cattle in slow procession going
home. There wasn't a living creature near; there wasn't a sound to be
heard. I sat down on one of the felled trees and looked back for him.
'Come,' I said, softly--'come and sit by me here.'

"Why am I so particular about all this? I hardly know. The place made an
unaccountably vivid impression on me, and I can't help writing about
it. If I end badly--suppose we say on the scaffold?--I believe the last
thing I shall see, before the hangman pulls the drop, will be the
little shining pool, and the long, misty grazing-grounds, and the cattle
winding dimly home in the thickening night. Don't be alarmed, you worthy
creature! My fancies play me strange tricks sometimes; and there is a
little of last night's laudanum, I dare say, in this part of my letter.

"He came--in the strangest silent way, like a man walking in his
sleep--he came and sat down by me. Either the night was very close, or
I was by this time literally in a fever: I couldn't bear my bonnet on;
I couldn't bear my gloves. The want to look at him, and see what
his singular silence meant, and the impossibility of doing it in the
darkening light, irritated my nerves, till I thought I should have
screamed. I took his hand, to try if that would help me. It was burning
hot; and it closed instantly on mine--you know how. Silence, after
_that_, was not to be thought of. The one safe way was to begin talking
to him at once.

"'Don't despise me,' I said. 'I am obliged to bring you to this lonely
place; I should lose my character if we were seen together.'

"I waited a little. His hand warned me once more not to let the silence
continue. I determined to _make_ him speak to me this time.

"'You have interested me, and frightened me,' I went on. 'You have
written me a very strange letter. I must know what it means.'

"'It is too late to ask. _You_ have taken the way, and _I_ have taken
the way, from which there is no turning back.' He made that strange
answer in a tone that was quite new to me--a tone that made me even more
uneasy than his silence had made me the moment before. 'Too late,' he
repeated--'too late! There is only one question to ask me now.'

"'What is it?'

"As I said the words, a sudden trembling passed from his hand to mine,
and told me instantly that I had better have held my tongue. Before I
could move, before I could think, he had me in his arms. 'Ask me if I
love you,' he whispered. At the same moment his head sank on my bosom;
and some unutterable torture that was in him burst its way out, as it
does with _us_, in a passion of sobs and tears.

"My first impulse was the impulse of a fool. I was on the point of
making our usual protest and defending myself in our usual way. Luckily
or unluckily, I don't know which, I have lost the fine edge of the
sensitiveness of youth; and I checked the first movement of my hands,
and the first word on my lips. Oh, dear, how old I felt, while he was
sobbing his heart out on my breast! How I thought of the time when he
might have possessed himself of my love! All he had possessed himself of
now was--my waist.

"I wonder whether I pitied him? It doesn't matter if I did. At any rate,
my hand lifted itself somehow, and my fingers twined themselves softly
in his hair. Horrible recollections came back to me of other times, and
made me shudder as I touched him. And yet I did it. What fools women
are!

"'I won't reproach you,' I said, gently. 'I won't say this is a cruel
advantage to take of me, in such a position as mine. You are dreadfully
agitated; I will let you wait a little and compose yourself.'

"Having got as far as that, I stopped to consider how I should put the
questions to him that I was burning to ask. But I was too confused,
I suppose, or perhaps too impatient to consider. I let out what was
uppermost in my mind, in the words that came first.

"'I don't believe you love me,' I said. 'You write strange things to
me; you frighten me with mysteries. What did you mean by saying in your
letter that it would be fatal to Mr. Armadale if you came back to me?
What danger can there be to Mr. Armadale--?'

"Before I could finish the question, he suddenly lifted his head and
unclasped his arms. I had apparently touched some painful subject which
recalled him to himself. Instead of my shrinking from _him_, it was he
who shrank from _me_. I felt offended with him; why, I don't know--but
offended I was; and I thanked him with my bitterest emphasis for
remembering what was due to me, _at last_!

"'Do you believe in Dreams?' he burst out, in the most strangely abrupt
manner, without taking the slightest notice of what I had said to him.
'Tell me,' he went on, without allowing me time to answer, 'were you, or
was any relation of yours, ever connected with Allan Armadale's father
or mother? Were you, or was anybody belonging to you, ever in the island
of Madeira?'

"Conceive my astonishment, if you can. I turned cold. In an instant I
turned cold all over. He was plainly in the secret of what had happened
when I was in Mrs. Armadale's service in Madeira--in all probability
before he was born! That was startling enough of itself. And he had
evidently some reason of his own for trying to connect _me_ with those
events--which was more startling still.

"'No,' I said, as soon as I could trust myself to speak. 'I know nothing
of his father or mother.'

"'And nothing of the island of Madeira?'

"'Nothing of the island of Madeira.'

"He turned his head away, and began talking to himself.

"'Strange!' he said. 'As certainly as I was in the Shadow's place at the
window, _she_ was in the Shadow's place at the pool!'

"Under other circumstances, his extraordinary behavior might have
alarmed me. But after his question about Madeira, there was some greater
fear in me which kept all common alarm at a distance. I don't think I
ever determined on anything in my life as I determined on finding out
how he had got his information, and who he really was. It was quite
plain to me that I had roused some hidden feeling in him by my question
about Armadale, which was as strong in its way as his feeling for _me_.
What had become of my influence over him?

"I couldn't imagine what had become of it; but I could and did set to
work to make him feel it again.

"'Don't treat me cruelly,' I said; 'I didn't treat _you_ cruelly just
now. Oh, Mr. Midwinter, it's so lonely, it's so dark--don't frighten
me!'

"'Frighten you!' He was close to me again in a moment. 'Frighten you!'
He repeated the word with as much astonishment as if I had woke him from
a dream, and charged him with something that he had said in his sleep.

"It was on the tip of my tongue, finding how I had surprised him, to
take him while he was off his guard, and to ask why my question about
Armadale had produced such a change in his behavior to me. But after
what had happened already, I was afraid to risk returning to the
subject too soon. Something or other--what they call an instinct, I dare
say--warned me to let Armadale alone for the present, and to talk to
him first about himself. As I told you in one of my early letters, I had
noticed signs and tokens in his manner and appearance which convinced
me, young as he was, that he had done something or suffered something
out of the common in his past life. I had asked myself more and more
suspiciously every time I saw him whether he was what he appeared to be;
and first and foremost among my other doubts was a doubt whether he was
passing among us by his real name. Having secrets to keep about my own
past life, and having gone myself in other days by more than one assumed
name, I suppose I am all the readier to suspect other people when I find
something mysterious about them. Any way, having the suspicion in
my mind, I determined to startle him, as he had startled me, by an
unexpected question on my side--a question about his name.

"While I was thinking, he was thinking; and, as it soon appeared, of
what I had just said to him. 'I am so grieved to have frightened you,'
he whispered, with that gentleness and humility which we all so heartily
despise in a man when he speaks to other women, and which we all so
dearly like when he speaks to ourselves. 'I hardly know what I have been
saying,' he went on; 'my mind is miserably disturbed. Pray forgive me,
if you can; I am not myself to-night.'

"'I am not angry,' I said; 'I have nothing to forgive. We are both
imprudent; we are both unhappy.' I laid my head on his shoulder. 'Do you
really love me?' I asked him, softly, in a whisper.

"His arm stole round me again; and I felt the quick beat of his heart
get quicker and quicker. 'If you only knew!' he whispered back; 'if you
only knew--' He could say no more. I felt his face bending toward mine,
and dropped my head lower, and stopped him in the very act of kissing
me.

"'No,' I said; 'I am only a woman who has taken your fancy. You are
treating me as if I was your promised wife.'

"'_Be_ my promised wife!' he whispered, eagerly, and tried to raise my
head. I kept it down. The horror of these old remembrances that you know
of came back and made me tremble a little when he asked me to be his
wife. I don't think I was actually faint; but something like faintness
made me close my eyes. The moment I shut them, the darkness seemed to
open as if lightning had split it; and the ghosts of _those other men_
rose in the horrid gap, and looked at me.

"'Speak to me!' he whispered, tenderly. 'My darling, my angel, speak to
me!'

"His voice helped me to recover myself. I had just sense enough left to
remember that the time was passing, and that I had not put my question
to him yet about his name.

"'Suppose I felt for you as you feel for me?' I said. 'Suppose I loved
you dearly enough to trust you with the happiness of all my life to
come?'

"I paused a moment to get my breath. It was unbearably still and close;
the air seemed to have died when the night came.

"'Would you be marrying me honorably,' I went on, 'if you married me in
your present name?'

"His arm dropped from my waist, and I felt him give one great start.
After that he sat by me, still, and cold, and silent, as if my question
had struck him dumb. I put my arm round his neck, and lifted my head
again on his shoulder. Whatever the spell was I had laid on him, my
coming closer in that way seemed to break it.

"'Who told you?' He stopped. 'No,' he went on, 'nobody can have told
you. What made you suspect--?' He stopped again.

"'Nobody told me,' I said; 'and I don't know what made me suspect. Women
have strange fancies sometimes. Is Midwinter really your name?'

"'I can't deceive you,' he answered, after another interval of silence;
'Midwinter is _not_ really my name.'

"I nestled a little closer to him.

"'What _is_ your name?' I asked.

"He hesitated.

"I lifted my face till my cheek just touched his. I persisted, with my
lips close at his ear:

"'What, no confidence in me even yet! No confidence in the woman who
has almost confessed she loves you--who has almost consented to be your
wife!'

"He turned his face to mine. For the second time he tried to kiss me,
and for the second time I stopped him.

"'If I tell you my name,' he said, 'I must tell you more.'

"I let my cheek touch his again.

"'Why not?' I said. 'How can I love a man--much less marry him--if he
keeps himself a stranger to me?'

"There was no answering that, as I thought. But he did answer it.

"'It is a dreadful story,' he said. 'It may darken all your life, if you
know it, as it has darkened mine.'

"I put my other arm round him, and persisted. 'Tell it me; I'm not
afraid; tell it me.'

"He began to yield to my other arm.

"'Will you keep it a sacred secret?' he said. 'Never to be
breathed--never to be known but to you and me?'

"I promised him it should be a secret. I waited in a perfect frenzy of
expectation. Twice he tried to begin, and twice his courage failed him.

"'I can't!' he broke out in a wild, helpless way. 'I can't tell it!'

"My curiosity, or more likely my temper, got beyond all control. He had
irritated me till I was reckless what I said or what I did. I suddenly
clasped him close, and pressed my lips to his. 'I love you!' I whispered
in a kiss. '_Now_ will you tell me?'

"For the moment he was speechless. I don't know whether I did it
purposely to drive him wild. I don't know whether I did it involuntarily
in a burst of rage. Nothing is certain but that I interpreted his
silence the wrong way. I pushed him back from me in a fury the instant
after I had kissed him. 'I hate you!' I said. 'You have maddened me into
forgetting myself. Leave me. I don't care for the darkness. Leave me
instantly, and never see me again!'

"He caught me by the hand and stopped me. He spoke in a new voice; he
suddenly _commanded_, as only men can.

"'Sit down,' he said. 'You have given me back my courage--you shall know
who I am.'

"In the silence and the darkness all round us, I obeyed him, and sat
down.

"In the silence and the darkness all round us, he took me in his arms
again, and told me who he was."

----------

"Shall I trust you with his story? Shall I tell you his real name? Shall
I show you, as I threatened, the thoughts that have grown out of my
interview with him and out of all that has happened to me since that
time?

"Or shall I keep his secret as I promised? and keep my own secret too,
by bringing this weary, long letter to an end at the very moment when
you are burning to hear more!

"Those are serious questions, Mrs. Oldershaw--more serious than you
suppose. I have had time to calm down, and I begin to see, what I
failed to see when I first took up my pen to write to you, the wisdom of
looking at consequences. Have I frightened myself in trying to frighten
_you_? It is possible--strange as it may seem, it is really possible.

"I have been at the window for the last minute or two, thinking. There
is plenty of time for thinking before the post leaves. The people are
only now coming out of church.

"I have settled to put my letter on one side, and to take a look at my
diary. In plainer words I must see what I risk if I decide on trusting
you; and my diary will show me what my head is too weary to calculate
without help. I have written the story of my days (and sometimes the
story of my nights) much more regularly than usual for the last week,
having reasons of my own for being particularly careful in this respect
under present circumstances. If I end in doing what it is now in my
mind to do, it would be madness to trust to my memory. The smallest
forgetfulness of the slightest event that has happened from the night of
my interview with Midwinter to the present time might be utter ruin to
me.

"'Utter ruin to her!' you will say. 'What kind of ruin does she mean?'

"Wait a little, till I have asked my diary whether I can safely tell
you."