Engineering had long ago come to an end.

Engineering is possible under one condition of the equation: Total
available Calories divided by Population equals Artistic-Technological
Style. When the ratio Calories-to-Population is large--say, five
thousand or more, five thousand daily calories for every living
person--then the Artistic-Technological Style is _big_. People carve
Mount Rushmore; they build great foundries; they manufacture enormous
automobiles to carry one housewife half a mile for the purchase of one
lipstick.

Life is coarse and rich where C:P is large. At the other extreme, where
C:P is too small, life does not exist at all. It has starved out.

Experimentally, add little increments to C:P and it will be some time
before the right-hand side of the equation becomes significant. But
at last, in the 1,000 to 1,500 calorie range, Artistic-Technological
Style firmly appears in self-perpetuating form. C:P in that range
produces the small arts, the appreciations, the peaceful arrangements
of necessities into subtle relationships of traditionally agreed-upon
virtue.

Think of Japan, locked into its Shogunate prison, with a hungry
population scrabbling food out of mountainsides and beauty out of
arrangements of lichens. The small, inexpensive sub-sub-arts are
characteristic of the 1,000 to 1,500 calorie range.

And this was the range of Earth, the world of ten billion men, when the
planet was stolen by its new binary.

Some few persons inexpensively studied the study of science with
pencil and renewable paper, but the last research accelerator had long
since been shut down. The juice from its hydro-power dam was needed to
supply meager light to a million homes and to cook the pablum for two
million brand-new babies.

In those days, one dedicated Byzantine wrote the definitive
encyclopedia of engineering (though he was no engineer). Its four
hundred and twenty tiny volumes examined exhaustively the engineering
feats of ancient Greece and Egypt, the Wall of Shih-Hwang Ti,
the Gothic builders, Brunel who changed the face of England, the
Roeblings of Brooklyn, Groves of the Pentagon, Duggan of the Shelter
System (before C:P dropped to the point where war became vanishingly
implausible), Levern of Operation Up. But the encyclopedist could not
use a slide rule without thinking, faltering, jotting down his decimals.

And then... the magnitudes grew less.

Under the tectonic and climatic battering of the great abduction of
Earth from its primary, under the sine-wave advances to and retreats
from the equator of the ice sheath, as the small successor Suns waxed,
waned, died and were replaced, the ratio C:P remained stable. C had
diminished enormously; so had P. As the calories to support life grew
scarce, so the consuming mouths of mankind grew less in number.

       *       *       *       *       *

The forty-fifth small Sun shone on no engineers.

Not even on the binary, perhaps. The Pyramids, the things on the
binary, the thing on Mount Everest--they were not engineers. They
employed a crude metaphysic based on dissection and shoving.

They had no elegant field theories. All they knew was that everything
came apart, and that if you pushed a thing, it would move.

If your biggest push would not move a thing, you took it apart and
pushed the parts, and then it would move. Sometimes, for nuclear
effects, they had to take things apart into 3 × 10^9 pieces and shove
each piece very carefully.

By taking apart and shoving, then, they landed their one spaceship
on the burned-out sunlet. Four human beings were on that ship. They
meditated briefly on Connectivity and died screaming.

A point of new flame appeared on the sunlet's surface and the spaceship
scrambled for the binary. The point of flame went from cherry through
orange into the blue-white and began to spread.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the moment of the Re-creation of the Sun, there was rejoicing on the
Earth.

Not quite everywhere, though. In Wheeling's House of the Five
Regulations, Glenn Tropile waited unquietly for death. Citizen Boyne,
who had run amok and slaughtered the baker, shared Tropile's room and
his doom, but not his rage. Boyne, with demure pleasure, was composing
his death poem.

"Talk to me!" snapped Tropile. "Why are we here? What did you do and
why did you do it? What have I done? Why don't I pick up a bench and
kill you with it? You would've killed me two hours ago if I'd caught
your eye!"

There was no satisfaction in Citizen Boyne; the passions were burned
out of him. He politely tendered Tropile a famous aphorism: "Citizen,
the art of living is the substitution of unimportant, answerable
questions for important, unanswerable ones. Come, let us appreciate the
new-born Sun."

He turned to the window, where the spark of blue-white flame in what
had once been the crater of Tycho was beginning to spread across the
charred moon.

Tropile was child enough of his culture to turn with him, almost
involuntarily. He was silent. That blue-white infinitesimal up there
growing slowly--the oneness, the calm rapture of Being in a universe
that you shaded into without harsh discontinua, the being one with the
great blue-white gem-flower blossoming now in the heavens that were no
different stuff than you yourself--

He closed his eyes, calm, and meditated on Connectivity.

He was being Good.

By the time the fusion reaction had covered the whole small disk of the
sunlet, a quarter-hour at the most, his meditation began to wear off.

Tropile shrugged out of his torn parka, not bothering to rip it
further. It was already growing warm in the room. Citizen Boyne, of
course, was carefully opening every seam with graceful rending motions,
miming great and smooth effort of the biceps and trapezius.

But the meditation was over, and as Tropile watched his cellmate, he
screamed a silent _Why?_ Since his adolescence, that wailing syllable
had seldom been far from his mind. It could be silenced by appreciation
and meditation.

Tropile's specialty was Water Watching and he was so good at it that
several beginners had asked him for instruction in the subtle art, in
spite of his notorious oddities of life and manner. He _enjoyed_ Water
Watching. He almost pitied anybody so single-mindedly devoted to, say,
Clouds and Odors--great game though it was--that he had never even
tried Water Watching. And after a session of Watching, when one was
lucky enough to observe the Nine Boiling Stages in classic perfection,
one might slip into meditation and be harmonious, feel Good.

But what did one do when the meditations failed, as they had failed
him? What did one do when they came farther and farther apart, became
less and less intense, could be inspired, finally, only by a huge event
like the renewal of the Sun?

One went amok, he had always thought.

But he had not. Boyne had. He had been declared a Son of the Wolf, on
no evidence that he could understand. Yet he had not run amok.

Still, the penalties were the same, he thought, uncomfortably aware
of an unfamiliar itch--not the inward intolerable itch of needing the
advantage, but a localized sensation at the base of his spine. The
penalties for all gross crimes--Wolfhood or running amok--were the
same, and simply this:

They would perform the Lumbar Puncture. He would make the Donation of
Spinal Fluid.

He would be dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Keeper of the House of Five Regulations, an old man, Citizen
Harmane, looked in on his charges--approvingly at Boyne, with a
beclouded expression at Glenn Tropile.

It was thought that even Wolves were entitled to the common human
decencies in the brief interval between exposure and the Donation
of Fluid. The Keeper would not have dreamed of scowling at the
detected Wolf or of interfering with whatever wretched imitation of
meditation-before-dying the creature might practice. But he could not,
all the same, bring himself to offer even an assurance-of-identity
gesture.

Tropile had no such qualms.

He scowled at Keeper Harmane with such ferocity that the old man almost
hurried away. He turned an almost equally ugly scowl upon Citizen
Boyne. How dared that knife-murderer be so calm, so relaxed!

Tropile said brutally: "They'll kill us! You know that? They'll stick
a needle in our spines and drain us dry. It _hurts_. Do you understand
me? They're going to drain us, and then they're going to drink our
spinal fluid, and it's going to _hurt_."

He was gently corrected. "We shall make the Donation," Citizen Boyne
said calmly. "Is not the difference intelligible to a Son of the Wolf?"

True culture demanded that that remark be accepted as a friendly joke,
probably based on a truth--how else could an unpalatable truth be put
in words? Otherwise the unthinkable might happen. They might quarrel.
They might even come to blows!

The appropriate mild smile formed on Tropile's lips, but harshly he
wiped it off. They were going to _kill_ him. He would _not_ smile for
them! And the effort was enormous.

"I'm _not_ a Son of the Wolf!" he howled, desperate, knowing he was
protesting to the man of all men in Wheeling who didn't care, and
who could do least about it if he did. "What's this crazy talk about
Wolves? I don't know what a Son of the Wolf is and I don't think you
or anybody does. All I know is that I was acting _sensibly_. And
everybody began howling! You're supposed to know a Son of the Wolf by
his unculture, his ignorance, his violence. But you chopped down three
people and I only picked up a piece of bread! And _I'm_ supposed to be
the dangerous one!"

"Wolves never know they're Wolves," sighed Citizen Boyne. "Fish
probably think they're birds and you evidently think you're a Citizen.
Would a Citizen speak as you are speaking?"

"But they're going to kill us!"

"Then why aren't you composing your death poem?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Glenn Tropile took a deep breath. Something was biting him. It was bad
enough that he was about to die, bad enough that he had done nothing
worth dying for. But what was gnawing at him now had nothing to do with
dying.

The percentages were going the wrong way. This pale Citizen was getting
an edge on him.

An engorged gland in Tropile's adrenals--it was only a pinhead
in Citizen Boyne's--gushed raw hormones into his bloodstream. He
could die, yes--that was a skill everyone had to acquire, sooner or
later. But while he was alive, he could not stand to be bested in an
encounter, an argument, a relationship--not and stay alive. Wolf? Call
him Wolf. Call him Operator, or Percentage Player; call him Sharp
Article; call him Gamesman.

If there was an advantage to be derived, he would derive it. It was the
way he was put together.

He said, for time: "You're right. Stupid of me. I must have lost my
head!"

He thought. Some men think by poking problems apart; some think by
laying facts side by side to compare. Tropile's thinking was neither
of these, but a species of judo. He conceded to his opponent such
things as Strength, Armor, Resource. He didn't need these things for
himself; to every contest, the opponent brought enough of them to
supply two. It was Tropile's habit (and Wolfish, he had to admit) to
use the opponent's strength against him, to break the opponent against
his own steel walls.

He thought.

The first thing was to make up his mind: He was Wolf. Then let him _be_
Wolf. He wouldn't stay around for the spinal tap; he would go from
there. But how?

The second thing was to plan. There were obstacles. Citizen Boyne was
one. The Keeper of the House of the Five Regulations was another.

Where was the pole which would permit him to vault over these hurdles?
There was always his wife, Gala. He owned her; she would do what he
wished--provided he made her _want_ to do it.

Yes, Gala. He walked to the door and shouted to Citizen Harmane:
"Keeper! I must see my wife! Have her brought to me!"

It was impossible for the Keeper to refuse. He called gently, "I will
invite the Citizeness," and toddled away.

The third thing was time.

Tropile turned to Citizen Boyne. "Citizen," he said persuasively,
"since your death poem is ready and mine is not, will you be gracious
enough to go first when they--when they come?"

Citizen Boyne looked temperately at his cellmate and made the Quirked
Smile.

"You see?" he said. "Wolf."

And that was true. But what was also true was that Boyne couldn't and
didn't refuse.