Roget Germyn, banker, of Wheeling, West Virginia, a Citizen, woke
gently from a Citizen's dreamless sleep. It was the third-hour-rising
time, the time proper to a day of exceptional opportunity to appreciate.

Citizen Germyn dressed himself in the clothes proper for the
appreciation of great works--such as viewing the Empire State ruins
against storm clouds from a small boat, or walking in silent single
file across the remaining course of the Golden Gate Bridge. Or as
today--one hoped--witnessing the Re-creation of the Sun.

Germyn with difficulty retained a Citizen's necessary calm. One was
tempted to meditate on improper things: Would the Sun be re-created?
What if it were not?

He put his mind to his dress. First of all, he put on an old and
storied bracelet, a veritable identity bracelet of heavy silver links
and a plate which was inscribed:

                           PFC JOE HARTMANN
                                _Korea_
                                 1953

His fellow jewelry-appreciators would have envied him that bracelet--if
they had been capable of such an emotion as envy. No other ID bracelet
as much as two hundred and fifty years old was known to exist in
Wheeling.

His finest shirt and pair of light pants went next to his skin,
and over them he wore a loose parka whose seams had been carefully
weakened. When the Sun was re-created, every five years or so, it was
the custom to remove the parka gravely and rend it with the prescribed
graceful gestures... but not so drastically that it could not be
stitched together again. Hence the weakened seams.

This was, he counted, the forty-first day on which he and all of
Wheeling had donned the appropriate Sun Re-creation clothing. It was
the forty-first day on which the Sun--no longer white, no longer
blazing yellow, no longer even bright red--had risen and displayed a
color that was darker maroon and always darker.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had, thought Citizen Germyn, never grown so dark and so cold in all
of his life. Perhaps it was an occasion for special viewing. For surely
it would never come again, this opportunity to see the old Sun so near
to death....

One hoped.

Gravely, Citizen Germyn completed his dressing, thinking only of
the act of dressing itself. It was by no means his specialty, but
he considered, when it was done, that he had done it well, in the
traditional flowing gestures, with no flailing, at all times balanced
lightly on the ball of the foot. It was all the more perfectly
consummated because no one saw it but himself.

He woke his wife gently, by placing the palm of his hand on her
forehead as she lay neatly, in the prescribed fashion, on the Woman's
Third of the bed.

The warmth of his hand gradually penetrated the layers of sleep. Her
eyes demurely opened.

"Citizeness Germyn," he greeted her, making the assurance-of-identity
sign with his left hand.

"Citizen Germyn," she said, with the assurance-of-identity inclination
of the head which was prescribed when the hands are covered.

He retired to his tiny study.

It was the time appropriate to meditation on the properties of
Connectivity. Citizen Germyn was skilled in meditation, even for a
banker; it was a grace in which he had schooled himself since earliest
childhood.

Citizen Germyn, his young face composed, his slim body erect as he
sat but in no way tense or straining, successfully blanked out, one
after another, all of the external sounds and sights and feelings that
interfered with proper meditation. His mind was very nearly vacant
except of one central problem: Connectivity.

Over his head and behind, out of sight, the cold air of the room seemed
to thicken and form a--call it a blob; a blob of air.

There was a name for those blobs of air. They had been seen before.
They were a known fact of existence in Wheeling and in all the world.
They came. They hovered. And they went away--sometimes not alone. If
someone had been in the room with Citizen Germyn to look at it, he
would have seen a distortion, a twisting of what was behind the blob,
like flawed glass, a lens, like an eye. And they were called Eye.

Germyn meditated.

The blob of air grew and slowly moved. A vagrant current that spun out
from it caught a fragment of paper and whirled it to the floor. Germyn
stirred. The blob retreated.

Germyn, all unaware, disciplined his thoughts to disregard the
interruption, to return to the central problem of Connectivity. The
blob hovered....

From the other room, his wife's small, thrice-repeated throat-clearing
signaled to him that she was dressed. Germyn got up to go to her, his
mind returning to the world; and the overhead Eye spun relentlessly,
and disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some miles east of Wheeling, Glenn Tropile--of a class which found it
wisest to give itself no special name, and which had devoted much time
and thought to shaking the unwelcome name it had been given--awoke on
the couch of his apartment.

He sat up, shivering. It was cold. The damned Sun was still bloody dark
outside the window and the apartment was soggy and chilled.

He had kicked off the blankets in his sleep. _Why couldn't_ he learn
to sleep quietly, like anybody else? Lacking a robe, he clutched the
blankets around him, got up and walked to the unglassed window.

It was not unusual for Glenn Tropile to wake up on his couch. This
happened because Gala Tropile had a temper, was inclined to exile
him from her bed after a quarrel, and--the operative factor--he knew
he always had the advantage over her for the whole day following the
night's exile. Therefore the quarrel was worth it. An advantage was, by
definition, worth anything you paid for it or else it was no advantage.

He could hear her moving about in one of the other rooms and cocked an
ear, satisfied. She hadn't waked him. Therefore she was about to make
amends. A little itch in his spine or his brain--it was not a physical
itch, so he couldn't locate it; he could only be sure that it was
there--stopped troubling him momentarily; he was winning a contest. It
was Glenn Tropile's nature to win contests... and his nature to create
them.

Gala Tropile, young, dark, attractive, with a haunted look, came in
tentatively carrying coffee from some secret hoard of hers.

Glenn Tropile affected not to notice. He stared coldly out at the cold
landscape. The sea, white with thin ice, was nearly out of sight, so
far had it retreated as the little sun waned.

"Glenn--"

Ah, good! _Glenn._ Where was the proper mode of
first-greeting-one's-husband? Where was the prescribed throat-clearing
upon entering a room?

Assiduously, he had untaught her the meticulous ritual of manners that
they had all of them been brought up to know; and it was the greatest
of his many victories over her that sometimes, now, _she_ was the
aggressor, _she_ would be the first to depart from the formal behavior
prescribed for Citizens.

Depravity! Perversion!

Sometimes they would touch each other at times which were not the
appropriate coming-together times, Gala sitting on her husband's lap in
the late evening, perhaps, or Tropile kissing her awake in the morning.
Sometimes he would force her to let him watch her dress--no, not now,
for the cold of the waning sun made that sort of frolic unattractive,
but she had permitted it before; and such was his mastery over her that
he knew she would permit it again, when the Sun was re-created....

If, a thought came to him, _if_ the Sun was re-created.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned away from the cold outside and looked at his wife. "Good
morning, darling." She was contrite.

He demanded jarringly: "Is it?" Deliberately he stretched, deliberately
he yawned, deliberately he scratched his chest. Every movement was
ugly. Gala Tropile quivered, but said nothing.

Tropile flung himself on the better of the two chairs, one hairy leg
protruding from under the wrapped blankets. His wife was on her best
behavior--in his unique terms; she didn't avert her eyes.

"What've you got there?" he asked. "Coffee?"

"Yes, dear. I thought--"

"Where'd you get it?"

The haunted eyes looked away. Still better, thought Glenn Tropile,
more satisfied even than usual; she's been ransacking an old warehouse
again. It was a trick he had taught her, and like all of the illicit
tricks she had learned from him, a handy weapon when he chose to use it.

It was not prescribed that a Citizen should rummage through Old Places.
A Citizen did his work, whatever that work might be--banker, baker or
furniture repairman. He received what rewards were his due for the work
he did. A Citizen _never_ took anything that was not his due--not even
if it lay abandoned and rotting.

It was one of the differences between Glenn Tropile and the people he
moved among.

I've got it made, he exulted; it was what I needed to clinch my victory
over her.

He spoke: "I need you more than I need coffee, Gala."

She looked up, troubled.

"What would I do," he demanded, "if a beam fell on you one day while
you were scrambling through the fancy groceries? How can you take such
chances? Don't you _know_ what you mean to me?"

She sniffed a couple of times. She said brokenly: "Darling, about last
night--I'm sorry--" and miserably held out the cup. He took it and set
it down. He took her hand, looked up at her, and kissed it lingeringly.
He felt her tremble. Then she gave him a wild, adoring look and flung
herself into his arms.

A new dominance cycle was begun at the moment he returned her frantic
kisses.

Glenn knew, and Gala knew, that he had over her an edge, an
advantage--the weather gauge, initiative of fire, percentage, the
can't-lose lack of tension. Call it anything, but it was life itself to
such as Glenn Tropile. He knew, and she knew, that having the advantage
he would press it and she would yield--on and on, in a rising spiral.

He did it because it was his life, the attaining of an advantage over
anyone he might encounter; because he was (unwelcomely but justly)
called a Son of the Wolf.

       *       *       *       *       *

A world away, a Pyramid squatted sullenly on the planed-off top of the
highest peak of the Himalayas.

It had not been built there. It had not been carried there by Man or
Man's machines. It had--come, in its own time; for its own reasons.

Did it wake on that day, the thing atop Mount Everest, or did it
ever sleep? Nobody knew. It stood, or sat, there, approximately a
tetrahedron. Its appearance was known: constructed on a base line of
some thirty-five yards, slaggy, midnight-blue in color. Almost nothing
else about it was known--at least, to mankind.

It was the only one of its kind on Earth, though men thought (without
much sure knowledge) that there were more, perhaps many thousands more,
like it on the unfamiliar planet that was Earth's binary, swinging
around the miniature Sun that hung at their common center of gravity
like an unbalanced dumbbell. But men knew very little about that planet
itself, only that it had come out of space and was now there.

Time was when men had tried to label that binary, more than two
centuries before, when it had first appeared. "Runaway Planet." "The
Invader." "Rejoice in Messias, the Day Is at Hand." The labels were
sense-free; they were Xs in an equation, signifying only that there was
_something_ there which was unknown.

"The Runaway Planet" stopped running when it closed on Earth.

"The Invader" didn't invade; it merely sent down one slaggy,
midnight-blue tetrahedron to Everest.

And "Rejoice in Messias" stole Earth from its sun--with Earth's old
moon, which it converted into a miniature sun of its own.

That was the time when men were plentiful and strong--or thought they
were--with many huge cities and countless powerful machines. It didn't
matter. The new binary planet showed no interest in the cities or the
machines.

There was a plague of things like Eyes--dust-devils without dust,
motionless air that suddenly tensed and quivered into lenticular
shapes. They came with the planet and the Pyramid, so that there
probably was some connection. But there was nothing to do about the
Eyes. Striking at them was like striking at air--was the same thing, in
fact.

While the men and machines tried uselessly to do something about it,
the new binary system--the stranger planet and Earth--began to move,
accelerating very slowly.

But accelerating.

In a week, astronomers knew something was happening. In a month, the
Moon sprang into flame and became a new sun--beginning to be needed,
for already the parent Sol was visibly more distant, and in a few years
it was only one other star among many.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the little sun was burned to a clinker, they--whoever "they"
were, for men saw only the one Pyramid--would hang a new one in the
sky. It happened every five clock-years, more or less. It was the same
old moon-turned-sun, but it burned out, and the fires needed to be
rekindled.

The first of these suns had looked down on an Earthly population of ten
billion. As the sequence of suns waxed and waned, there were changes,
climatic fluctuation, all but immeasurable differences in the quantity
and kind of radiation from the new source.

The changes were such that the forty-fifth such sun looked down on a
shrinking human race that could not muster up a hundred million.

A frustrated man drives inward; it is the same with a race. The
hundred million that clung to existence were not the same as the bold,
vital ten billion.

The thing on Everest had, in its time, received many labels, too: The
Devil, The Friend, The Beast, A Pseudo-living Entity of Quite Unknown
Electrochemical Properties.

All these labels were also Xs.

If it did wake that morning, it did not open its eyes, for it had no
eyes--apart from the quivers of air that might or might not belong
to it. Eyes might have been gouged; therefore it had none. So an
illogical person might have argued--and yet it was tempting to apply
the "purpose, not function" fallacy to it. Limbs could be crushed; it
had no limbs. Ears could be deafened; it had none. Through a mouth, it
might be poisoned; it had no mouth. Intentions and actions could be
frustrated; apparently it had neither.

It was there. That was all.

It and others like it had stolen the Earth and the Earth did not know
why. It was there. And the one thing on Earth you could not do was hurt
it, influence it, or coerce it in any way whatever.

It was there--and it, or the masters it represented, owned the Earth by
right of theft. Utterly. Beyond human hope of challenge or redress.