Tropile swam up out of hammering blackness into daylight and pain.

It _hurt_. He was being born again--coming back to life--and it had
all the agonies of parturition, except that they were visited upon the
creature being born, himself. There were crushing blows at his temples
that pounded and pained like no other ache he had ever felt. He moaned
raspingly.

Someone moved blurrily over his shut eyes. He felt something sting
sharply at the base of his brain. Then it tingled, warming his scalp,
comforting it, numbing it. Pain went slowly away.

He opened his eyes.

Four masked torturers were leaning over him. He stared, not
understanding; but the eyes were not torturers' eyes, and in a moment
the masks came off. Surgical masks--and the faces beneath the masks
were human faces.

Surgeons and nurses.

He blinked at them and said groggily: "Where am we?" And then he
remembered.

He was back on Earth; he was merely human again.

Someone came bustling into the room and he knew without looking that it
was Haendl.

"We beat them, Tropile!" Haendl cried. "No, cancel that. _You_ beat
them. We've destroyed every Pyramid there was, and a nice hot fire
they're making up there on the sun, eh? Beautiful work, Tropile.
Beautiful! You're a credit to the name of Wolf!"

The surgeons stirred uneasily, but apparently, Tropile thought, there
had been changes, for they did no more than that.

Tropile touched his temples fretfully and his fingers rested on gauze
bandages. It was true: he was out of circuit. The long reach of his
awareness was cut short at his skull; there was no more of the infinite
sweep and grasp he had known as part of the snowflake in the nutrient
fluid.

"Too bad," he whispered hopelessly.

"What?" Haendl frowned. The nurse next to him whispered something and
he nodded. "Oh, I see. You're still a little groggy, right? Well,
that's not hard to understand--they tell me it was a tricky job of
surgery, separating you from that gunk the Pyramids had wired into
your head."

"Yes," said Tropile, and closed his ears, though Haendl went on
talking. After a while, Tropile pushed himself up and swung his legs
over the side of the operating table. He was naked. Once that would
have bothered him enormously, but now it didn't seem to matter.

"Find me some clothes, will you?" he asked. "I'm back. I might as well
start getting used to it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Glenn Tropile found that he was a returning hero, attracting a curious
sort of hero-worship wherever he went. It was not, he thought after
careful analysis, _exactly_ what he might have expected. For instance,
a man who went out and killed a dragon in the old days was received
with great gratitude and rejoicing, and if there was a prince's
daughter around, he married her. Fair enough, after all. And Tropile
had slain a foe more potent than any number of dragons.

But he tested the attention he received and found no gratitude in it.
It was odd.

What it was like most of all, he thought, was the sort of attention a
reigning baseball champion might get--in a country where cricket was
the national game. He had done something which, everybody agreed, was
an astonishing feat, but about which nobody seemed to care. Indeed,
there was an area of accusation in some of the attention he got.

Item: nearly ninety thousand erstwhile Components had now been brought
back to ambient life, most of them with their families long dead, all
of them a certain drain on the limited resources of the planet. And
what was Glenn Tropile going to do about it?

Item: the old distinctions between Citizen and Wolf no longer made much
sense now that so many Componentized Citizens had fought shoulder to
shoulder with Componentized Sons of the Wolf. But didn't Glenn Tropile
think he had gone a little too far _there_?

And item--looking pretty far ahead, of course, but still--well, just
what _was_ Glenn Tropile going to do about providing a new sun for
Earth, when the old one wore out and there would be no Pyramids to tend
the fire?

He sought refuge with someone who would understand him. That, he was
pleased to realize, was easy. He had come to know several persons
extremely well. Loneliness, the tortured loneliness of his youth, was
permanently behind him, _definitely_.

For example, he could seek out Haendl, who would understand everything
very well.

Haendl said: "It is a bit of a letdown, I suppose. Well, hell with
it; that's life." He laughed grimly. "Now that we've got rid of the
Pyramids, there's plenty of other work to be done. Man, we can breathe
now! We can plan ahead! This planet has maundered along in its stupid,
rutted, bogged-down course too many years already, eh? It's time we
took over! And we'll be doing it, I promise you. You know, Tropile--"
he sniggered--"I only regret one thing."

"What's that?" Tropile asked cautiously.

"All those weapons, out of reach! Oh, I'm not _blaming_ you. But you
can see what a lot of trouble it's going to be now, stocking up all
over again--and there isn't much we can do about bringing order to
this tired old world, is there, until we've got the guns to do it with
again?"

Tropile left him much sooner than he had planned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Citizen Germyn, then? The man had fought well, if nothing else. Tropile
went to find him and, for a moment at least, it was very good. Germyn
said: "I've been doing a lot of thinking, Tropile. I'm glad you're
here." He sent his wife for refreshments, and decorously she brought
them in, waited for exactly one minute, and then absented herself.

Tropile burst into speech as soon as she left. "I'm beginning to
realize what has happened to the human race, Germyn. I don't mean just
now, when we licked the Pyramids and so on. No, I mean hundreds of
years ago, what happened when the Pyramids arrived, and what has been
happening since. Did you ever hear of Indians, Germyn?"

Germyn frowned minutely and shrugged.

"They were, oh, hundreds _and_ hundreds of years ago. They were a
different color and not very civilized--of course, nobody was then. But
the Indians were nomads, herdsmen, hunters--like that. And the white
people came from Europe and wanted this country for themselves. So they
took it. And do you know something? I don't think the Indians ever knew
what hit them."

"_They_ didn't know about land grants and claiming territory for the
crown and church missions and expanding populations. They didn't have
those things. It's true that they learned pretty well, by and by--at
least they learned things like guns and horses and firewater; they
didn't have those things, either, but they could see some sense to
them, you know. But I really don't think the Indians ever knew exactly
what the Europeans were up to, until it was too late to matter.

"And it was the same with us and the Pyramids, only more so. What
the devil _did_ they want? I mean, yes, we found out what they did
with the Translated people. But what were they _up_ to? What did
they _think_? _Did_ they think? You know, I've got a kind of a crazy
idea--maybe it's not crazy, maybe it's the truth. Anyway, I've been
thinking. Suppose even the _Pyramids_ weren't the Pyramids? We never
talked to one of them. We never gave it a Rorschach or tested its knee
jerks. We licked them, but we don't know anything about them. We don't
even know if they were the guys that started the whole bloody thing, or
if they were just sort of super-sized Components themselves. Do we?

"And meanwhile, here's the human race, up against something that it not
only can't understand, same as the Indians couldn't the whites, but
that it can't begin to make a _guess_ about. At least the Indians had
a clue now and then, you know--I mean they'd see the sailors off the
great white devil ship making a beeline for the Indian women and so on,
and they'd begin to understand there was _something_ in common. But we
didn't have that much.

"So what did we do? Why, we did like the reservation Indians. We turned
inward. We got loaded on firewater--Meditation--and we closed our minds
to the possibility of ever expanding again. And there we were, all
tied up in our own knots. Most of the race rebelled against action,
because it had proven useless--Citizens. A few of the race rebelled
against _that_, because it was not only useless but _deliberately_
useless--Wolves. But they're the same kind of people. You've seen that
for yourself, right? And--"

Tropile stopped, suddenly aware that Citizen Germyn was looking tepidly
pained.

"What's the matter?" Tropile demanded harshly.

Citizen Germyn gave him the faint deprecatory Quirked Smile. "I know
you thought you were a Wolf, but--I told you I've been thinking a lot,
and that's what I was thinking about. _Truly_, Citizen, you do yourself
no good by pretending that you really thought you were Wolf. Clearly
you were not; the rest of us might have been fooled, but certainly you
couldn't fool yourself.

"Now here's what I think you ought to do. When I found you were coming,
I asked several rather well-known Citizens to come here later this
evening. There won't be any embarrassment. I only want you to talk to
them and set the record straight, so that this terrible blemish will no
longer be held against you. Times change and perhaps a certain latitude
is advisable now, but certainly you don't want--"

Tropile also left Citizen Germyn sooner than he had expected to.

       *       *       *       *       *

There remained Alla Narova, but, queerly, she was not to be found.

Instantly it became clear to Tropile that it was she above all whom he
needed to talk to. He remembered the shared beauty of their plunging
drive through the neurone-guides of the Pyramids, the linked and
inextricable flow of their thoughts and of their most hidden feelings.

She could not be very far, he thought numbly, cursing the blindness of
his human eyes, the narrowness of his human senses. Time was when two
worlds could not have hidden her from him; but that time was gone. He
walked from place to place with the angry resentful tread of one used
to riding--no, to flying, or faster than flying. He asked after her. He
searched.

And at last he found--not her. A note. At one of the stations where the
re-awakened Components were funneled back into human affairs, there was
a letter waiting for him:

    _I'm sure you will look for me. Please don't. You thought that
    there were no secrets between us, but there was one._

    _When I was Translated, I was sixty-one years old. Two years before
    that, I was caught in a collapsing building; my legs are useless,
    and I had grown quite fat. I do not want you to see me fat and
    old._

    _Alla Narova._

And that was that, and at last Glenn Tropile turned to the last person
of all those on his list who had known him well. Her name was Gala
Tropile.

       *       *       *       *       *

She had got thinner, he observed. They sat together quietly and there
was considerable awkwardness, but then he noticed that she was weeping.
Comforting her ended the awkwardness and he found that he was talking:

"It was like being a god, Gala! I swear, there's no feeling like it.
I mean it's like--well, maybe if you'd just had a baby, and invented
fire, and moved a mountain, and transmuted lead into gold--maybe if
you'd done all of those things, then you might have some idea. But I
was everywhere at once, Gala, and I could do anything! I fought a whole
world of Pyramids, do you realize that? Me! And now I come back to--"

He stopped her in time; it seemed she was about to weep again.

He went on: "No, Gala, don't misunderstand, I don't hold anything
against you. You were right to leave me in the field. What did I have
to offer you? Or myself, for that matter? And I don't know that I have
anything now, but--"

He slammed his fist against the table. "They talk about putting the
Earth back in its orbit! Why? And how? My God, Gala, we don't know
_where_ we are. Maybe we could tinker up the gadgets the Pyramids used
and turn our course backward--but do you know what Old Sol looks like?
I don't. I never saw it.

"And neither did you or anyone else alive.

"It was like being a god--

"And they talk about going back to things as they were--

"I'm sick of that kind of thinking! Wolves or Citizens, they're dead on
their feet and don't know it. I suppose they'll snap out of it in time,
but I can't wait. I won't live that long.

"Unless--"

He paused and looked at her, confused.

Gala Tropile met her husband's eyes.

"Unless what, Glenn?"

He shrugged and turned away.

"Unless you go back, you mean." He stared at her; she nodded. "You want
to go back," she said, without stress. "You don't want to stay here
with me, do you? You want to go back into that tub of soup again and
float like a baby. You don't want to _have_ babies--you want to _be_
one."

"Gala, you don't understand. We can own the Universe. I mean mankind
can. And I can do it. Why not? There's nothing for me--"

"That's right, Glenn. There's nothing for you here. Not any more."

He opened his mouth to speak, looked at her, spread his hands
helplessly. He didn't look back as he walked out the door, but he knew
that his back was turned not only on the woman who happened to be his
wife, but on mankind and all of the flesh.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was night outside, and warm. Tropile stood in the old street
surrounded by the low, battered houses--and he could make them new and
grand! He looked up at the stars that swung in constellations too new
and changeable to have names. _There_ was the Universe.

Words were no good; there was no explaining things in words. Naturally
he couldn't make Gala or anyone else understand, for flesh couldn't
grasp the realities of mind and spirit that were liberated from flesh.
Babies! A home! And the whole grubby animal business of eating and
drinking and sleeping! How could anyone ask to stay in the mire when
the stars challenged overhead?

He walked slowly down the street, alone in the night, an apprentice
godling renouncing mortality. There was nothing here for him, so why
this sense of loss?

Duty said (or was it Pride?): "Someone must give up the flesh to
control Earth's orbit and weather--why not you?"

Flesh said (or was it his soul--whatever that was?): "But you will be
_alone_."

He stopped, and for a moment he was poised between destiny and the
dust....

Until he became aware of footsteps behind him, running, and Gala's
voice: "Wait! Wait, Glenn! I want to go with you!"

And he turned and waited, but only until she caught up, and then he
went on.

But not--forever and always again--not alone.