Citizen Germyn, as was his right by position and status as a
connoisseur, helped prepare Citizen Boyne for his Donation. There
was nothing much to it--which made it an elaborate and lengthy task,
according to the ethic of the Citizens; it had to be protracted, each
step being surrounded by fullest dress of ritual.

It was done in the broad daylight of the new Sun, and as many of the
three hundred citizens of Wheeling as could manage it were in the
courtyard of the old Federal Building to watch.

The nature of the ceremony was this: A man who revealed himself Wolf,
or who finally crumbled under the demands of life and ran amok, could
not be allowed to live. He was hauled before an audience of his equals
and permitted--with the help of regretful force, if that should be
necessary, but preferably not--to make the Donation of Spinal Fluid.

Execution was murder and murder was not permitted under the gentle code
of Citizens; this was not execution. The draining of a man's spinal
fluid did not kill him. It only insured that, after a time and with
much suffering, his internal chemistry would so arrange itself that it
would continue to function, only not in a way that would sustain life.

Once the Donation was made, the problem was completely altered, of
course. Suffering was bad in itself. To save the Donor from the
suffering that lay ahead, it was the custom to have the oldest and
gentlest Citizen on hand stand by with a sharp-edged knife. When the
Donation was complete, the Donor's head was removed--purely to avert
suffering. That was not execution, either, but only the hastening of an
inevitable end.

The dozen or so Citizens whose rank permitted them to assist then
dissolved the spinal fluids in water and ceremoniously sipped them, at
which time it was proper to offer a small poem in commentary. All in
all, it was a perfectly splendid opportunity for the purest form of
meditation for everyone concerned.

Citizen Germyn, whose role was Catheter Bearer, took his place behind
the Introducer Bearer, the Annunciators and the Questioner of Purpose.
As he passed Citizen Boyne, Germyn assisted him to assume the proper
crouched-over position. Boyne looked up gratefully and Germyn found
the occasion correct for a commendatory half-smile.

The Questioner of Purpose said solemnly to Boyne: "It is your privilege
to make a Donation here today. Do you wish to do so?"

"I do," said Boyne raptly. The anxiety had passed; clearly he was
confident of making a good Donation. Germyn approved with all his heart.

The Annunciators, in alternate stanzas, announced the right pause for
meditation to the meager crowd, and all fell silent. Citizen Germyn
began the process of blanking out his mind, to ready himself for the
great opportunity to Appreciate that lay ahead. A sound distracted
him; he glanced up irritably. It seemed to come from the House of the
Five Regulations, a man's voice, carrying. But no one else appeared to
notice it. All of the watchers, all of those on the stone steps, were
in somber meditation.

Germyn tried to return his thoughts to where they belonged.

But something was troubling him. He had caught a glimpse of the Donor
and there had been something--something--

He angrily permitted himself to look up once more to see just what it
had been about Citizen Boyne that had attracted his attention.

Yes, there _was_ something. Over the form of Citizen Boyne, silent,
barely visible, a flicker of life and motion. Nothing tangible. It was
as if the air itself were in motion.

It was, Germyn thought with a bursting heart--it was an Eye!

The veritable miracle of Translation and it was about to take place
here and now, upon the person of Citizen Boyne! And no one knew it but
Germyn himself!

       *       *       *       *       *

In this last surmise, Citizen Germyn was wrong. Or was he? True, no
other human eyes saw the flawed-glass thing that twisted the air over
Boyne's prostrate body, but there was, in a sense, another witness...
some thousands of miles away.

The Pyramid on Mount Everest "stirred."

It did not move, but something about it moved, or changed, or radiated.
The Pyramid surveyed its--cabbage patch? Wristwatch mine? As much
sense, it may be, to say wristwatch patch or cabbage mine. At any rate,
it surveyed what to it was a place where intricate mechanisms grew,
ripened and were dug up at the moment of usefulness, whereupon they
were quick-frozen and wired into circuits.

Through signals perceptible to it, the Pyramids had become "aware" that
one of its mechanisms was now ready to be plucked--harvested.

The Pyramid's blood was dielectric fluid. Its limbs were electrostatic
charges. Its philosophy was: Unscrew It and Push. Its motive was
survival.

Survival today was not what survival once had been, for a Pyramid.

Once survival had merely been gliding along on a cushion of repellent
charges, streaming electrons behind for the push, sending h-f pulses
out often enough to get a picture of their bounced return to integrate
deep inside.

If the picture showed something metabolizable, one metabolized it. One
broke it down into molecules by lashing it with the surplus protons
left over from the dispersed electrons; one adsorbed the molecules.
Sometimes the metabolizable object was an Immobile and sometimes a
Mobile--a vague, theoretical, frivolous classification to a philosophy
whose basis was that _everything_ unscrewed. If it was a Mobile, one
sometimes had to move after it.

That was the difference.

The essential was survival, not making idle distinctions. And one small
part of survival today was the Everest Pyramid's job.

It sat and waited. It sent out its h-f pulses bouncing and scattering,
and it bounced and scattered them additionally on their return.
Deep inside, the more-than-anamorphically distorted picture was
reintegrated. Deeper inside, it was interpreted and evaluated for its
part in survival.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a need for certain mechanisms which grew on this planet. At
irregular times, the Pyramid evaluated the picture to the effect that
a mechanism--a wristwatch, so to speak--was ripe for plucking; and
by electrostatic charges, it did so. The electrostatic charges, in
forming, produced what humans called an Eye. But the Pyramid had no use
for names.

It merely plucked, when a mechanism was ripe. It had found that a
mechanism was ripe now.

A world away, before the steps of Wheeling's Federal Building,
electrostatic charges gathered above a component whose name was Citizen
Boyne. There was a small sound like the clapping of two hands which
made the three hundred citizens of Wheeling jerk upright out of their
meditations.

The sound was air filling the gap that had once been occupied by
Citizen Boyne, who had instantly vanished--who had, in a word, been
ripe and therefore been plucked.