THE PRICE OF COMFORT


Virginia knelt on the cushioned seat in the bay-window of her bedroom,
gazing expectantly down on the pavement below. It was her forty-fifth
birthday, and she was impatiently waiting for Harry, who was coming home
for a few days before going abroad to finish his studies at Oxford. The
house was a new, impeccably modern dwelling, produced by a triumph of
the utilitarian genius of the first decade of the twentieth century, and
Oliver had bought it at a prodigious price a few years after his
dramatic success had lifted him from poverty into comfort. The girls,
charmed to have made the momentous passage into Sycamore Street, were
delighted with the space and elegance of their new home, but Virginia
had always felt somehow as if she were visiting. The drawing-room, and
especially the butler's pantry, awed her. She had not dared to wash
those august shelves with soda, nor to fasten her favourite strips of
white oilcloth along their shining surfaces. The old joy of "fixing up"
her storeroom had been wrested from her by the supercilious mulatto
butler, who wore immaculate shirt fronts, but whom she suspected of
being untidy beneath his magnificent exterior. Once when she had
discovered a bucket of apple-parings tucked away under the sink, where
it had stood for days, he had given "notice" so unexpectedly and so
haughtily that she had been afraid ever since to look under dish-towels
or into hidden places while he was absent. Out of the problem of the
South "the servant question" had arisen to torment and intimidate the
housekeepers of Dinwiddie; and inferior service at high wages was
regarded of late as a thing for which one had come to be thankful. Had
they still lived in the little house, Virginia would gladly have done
her work for the sake of the peace and the cleanliness which it would
have ensured; but since the change in their circumstances, Oliver and
the girls had grown so dependent upon the small luxuries of living that
she put up with anything--even with the appalling suspicion that every
mouthful she ate was not clean--rather than take the risk of having her
three servants desert in a body. When she had unwisely complained to
Oliver, he had remarked impatiently that he couldn't be bothered about
the housekeeping, and Lucy had openly accused her of being "fussy."

After this she had said nothing more, but gathering suddenly all her
energies, she had precipitated a scene with the servants (which ended to
her relief in the departure of the magnificent butler) and had
reorganized at a stroke the affairs of her household. For all her
gentleness, she was not incapable of decisive action, and though it had
always been easier for her to work herself than to direct others, her
native talent for domesticity had enabled her to emerge triumphantly out
of this crisis. Now, on her forty-fifth birthday, she could reflect with
pride (the pride of a woman who has mastered her traditional _metier de
femme_) that there was not a house in Dinwiddie which had better food
or smoother service than she provided in hers. For more and more, as
Oliver absorbed himself in his work, which kept him in New York many
months of the year, and the children grew so big that they no longer
needed her, did her life centre around the small monotonous details of
cooking and cleaning. Only when, as occasionally happened, the rest of
the family were absent together, Oliver about his plays, Lucy on a visit
to Richmond, and Harry and Jenny at college, an awful sense of futility
descended upon her, and she felt that both the purpose and the
initiative were sapped from her character. Sometimes, during such days
or weeks of loneliness, she would think of her mother's words, uttered
so often in the old years at the rectory: "There isn't any pleasure in
making things unless there's somebody to make them for."

Beyond the window, the November day, which had been one of placid
contentment for her, was slowly drawing to its close. The pale red line
of an autumn sunset lingered in the west above the huddled roofs of the
town, while the mournful dusk of evening was creeping up from the earth.
A few chilled and silent sparrows hopped dejectedly along the bared
boughs of the young maple tree in front of the house, and every now and
then a brisk pedestrian would pass on the concrete pavement below.
Inside, a cheerful fire burned in the grate, and near it, on one end of
the chintz-covered couch, lay Oliver's present to her--a set of black
bear furs, which he had brought down with him from New York. Turning
away from the window, she slipped the neck-piece over her shoulders, and
as she did so, she tried to stifle the wonder whether he would have
bought them--whether even he would have remembered the date--if Harry
had not been with him. Last year he had forgotten her birthday--and
never before had he given her so costly a present as this. They were
beautiful furs, but even she, with her ignorance of the subtler arts of
dress, saw that they were too heavy for her, that they made her look
shrunken and small and accentuated the pallor of her skin, which had the
colour and the texture of withered rose-leaves. "They are just what
Jenny has always wanted, and they would be so becoming to her. I wonder
if Oliver would mind my letting her take them back to Bryn Mawr after
the holidays?"

If Oliver would mind! The phrase still remained after the spirit which
sanctified it had long departed. In her heart she knew--though her
happiness rested upon her passionate evasion of the knowledge--that
Oliver had not only ceased to mind, that he had even ceased to notice
whether she wore his gifts or gave them to Jenny.

A light step flitted along the hall; her door opened without shutting
again, and Lucy, in a street gown made in the princess style, hurried
across the room and turned a slender back appealingly towards her.

"Oh, mother, please unhook me as fast as you can. The Peytons are going
to take me in their car over to Richmond, and I've only a half hour in
which to get ready."

Then, as Virginia's hands fumbled a little at an obstinate hook, Lucy
gave an impatient pull of her shoulders, and reached back, straining her
arms, until she tore the offending fastenings from her dress. She was a
small, graceful girl, not particularly pretty, not particularly clever,
but possessing some indefinable quality which served her as
successfully as either beauty or cleverness could have done. Though she
was the most selfish and the least considerate of the three children,
Virginia was like wax in her hands, and regarded her dashing, rather
cynical, worldliness with naive and uncomprehending respect. She
secretly disapproved of Lucy, but it was a disapproval which was
tempered by admiration. It seemed miraculous to her that any girl of
twenty-two should possess so clearly formulated and critical a
philosophy of life, or should be so utterly emancipated from the last
shackles of reverence. As far as her mother could discern, Lucy
respected but a single thing, and that single thing was her own opinion.
For authority she had as little reverence as a savage; yet she was not a
savage, for she represented instead the perfect product of
over-civilization. The world was bounded for her by her own personality.
She was supremely interested in what she thought, felt, or imagined, and
beyond the limits of her individuality, she was frankly bored by
existence. The joys, sorrows, or experiences of others failed even to
arrest her attention. Yet the very simplicity and sincerity of her
egoism robbed it of offensiveness, and raised it from a trait of
character to the dignity of a point of view. The established law of
self-sacrifice which had guided her mother's life was not only
personally distasteful to her--it was morally indefensible. She was
engaged not in illustrating precepts of conduct, but in realizing her
independence; and this realization of herself appeared to her as the
supreme and peculiar obligation of her being. Though she was less fine
than Jenny, who in her studious way was a girl of much character, she
was by no means as superficial as she appeared, and might in time,
aided by fortuitous circumstances, make a strong and capable woman. Her
faults, after all, were due in a large measure to a training which had
consistently magnified in her mind the space which she would ultimately
occupy in the universe.

And she had charm. Without beauty, without intellect, without culture,
she was still able to dominate her surroundings by her inexplicable but
undeniable charm. She was one of those women of whom people say, "It is
impossible to tell what attracts men in a woman." She was indifferent,
she was casual, she was even cruel; yet every male creature she met fell
a victim before her. Her slightest gesture had a fascination for the
masculine mind; her silliest words a significance. "I declare men are
the biggest fools where women are concerned," Miss Priscilla had
remarked, watching her; and the words had adequately expressed the
opinion of the feminine half of Dinwiddie's population.

From sixteen to twenty-two she had remained as indifferent as a star to
the impassioned moths flitting around her. Then, a month after her
twenty-second birthday, she had coolly announced her engagement to a man
whom she had seen but six times--a widower at that, twelve years older
than herself, and the father of two children. The blow had fallen,
without warning, upon Virginia, who had never seen the man, and did not
like what she had heard of him. Unwisely, she had attempted to
remonstrate, and had been met by the reply, "Mother, dear, you must
allow me to decide what is for my happiness," and a manner which said,
"After all, you know so much less of life than I do, how can you advise
me?"

It was intolerable, of course, and the worst of it was that, rebel as
she might against the admission, Virginia could not plausibly deny the
truth of either the remark or the manner. On the face of it, Lucy must
know best what she wanted, and as for knowledge of life, she was
certainly justified in considering her mother a child beside her.
Oliver, when the case was put before him, showed a sympathy with
Virginia's point of view and a moral inability to coerce his daughter
into accepting it. "She knows I never liked Craven," he said, "but after
all what are we going to do about it? She's old enough to decide for
herself, and you can't in this century put a girl on bread and water
because she marries as she chooses."

Nothing about duty! nothing about consideration for her family! nothing
about the awful responsibility of entering lightly into such sacred
relations! Lucy was evidently in love--if she hadn't been, why on earth
should she have precipitated herself into an affair whose only reason
was a lack of reason that was conclusive?--but she might have been
engaging a chauffeur for all the solemnity she put into the
arrangements. She had selected her clothes and planned her wedding with
a practical wisdom which had awed and saddened her mother. All the
wistful sentiments, the tender evasions, the consecrated dreams that had
gone into the preparations for Virginia's marriage, were buried
somewhere under the fragrant past of the eighties--and the memory of
them made her feel not forty-five, but a hundred. Yet the thing that
troubled her most was a feeling that she was in the power of forces
which she did not understand--a sense that there were profound
disturbances beneath the familiar surface of life.

When Lucy had gone out, with her dress open down the back and a glimpse
of her smooth girlish shoulders showing between the fastenings, Virginia
went over to the window again, and was rewarded by the sight of Harry's
athletic figure crossing the street.

In a minute he came in, kissing her with the careless tenderness which
was one of her secret joys.

"Halloo! little mother! All alone? Where are the others?" He was the
only one of her children who appeared to enjoy her, and sometimes when
they were alone together, he would turn and put his arms about her, or
stroke her hands with an impulsive, protecting sympathy. There were
moments when it seemed to her that he pitied her because the world had
moved on without her; and others when he came to her for counsel about
things of which she was not only ignorant, but even a little afraid.
Once he had consulted her as to whether he should go on the football
team at his college, and had listened respectfully enough to her timid
objections. Respect, indeed, was the quality in which he had never
failed her, and this, even more than his affection, had become a balm to
her in recent years, when Lucy and Jenny occasionally lost patience and
showed themselves openly amused by her old-fashioned opinions. She had
never forgotten that he had once taken her part when the girls had tried
to persuade her to brush back the little curls from her temples and wear
her hair in a pompadour.

"It would look so much more suitable for a woman of your age, mother
dear," Lucy had remarked sweetly with a condescending deference which
had made Virginia feel as if she were a thousand.

"And it would be more becoming, too, now that your hair is turning
grey," Jenny had added, with an intention to be kind and helpful which
had gone wrong somehow and turned into officiousness.

"Shut up, and don't be silly geese," Harry had growled at them, and his
rudeness in her behalf had given Virginia a delicious thrill, which was
increased by the knowledge that his manners were usually excellent even
to his sisters. "You let them fuss all they want to, mother," he
concluded, "but your hair is a long sight better than theirs, and don't
you let them nag you into making a mess of it."

All of which had been sweet beyond words to Virginia, though she was
obliged to admit that his judgment was founded upon a deplorable lack of
discrimination in the matter of hairdressing--since Lucy and Jenny both
had magnificent hair, while her own had long since lost its gloss and
grown thin from neglect. But if it had been really the truth, it could
not have been half so sweet to her.

"Lucy is dressing to motor over to Richmond with the Peytons, and your
father went out to ride. Harry, why won't you let me go on to New York
to see you off?"

He was sailing the following week for England, and he had forbidden her
to come to his boat, or even to New York, for a last glimpse of him.

"Oh, I hate having a scene at the boat, mother. It always makes me feel
creepy to say good-bye. I never do it if I can help."

"I know you don't, darling--you sneaked off after the holidays without
telling me what train you were going by. But this is for such a long
time. Two years, Harry."

Her voice broke, and turning away, she gazed through the window at the
young maple tree as though her very soul were concentrated upon the
leafless boughs.

He stirred uneasily, for like most men of twenty-one, he had a horror of
sentiment.

"Oh, well, you may come over next summer, you know. I'll speak to father
about it. If his play goes over to London, he'll have to be there, won't
he?"

"I suppose so," she replied, choking down her tears, and becoming
suddenly cheerful. "And you'll write to me once a week, Harry?"

"You bet! By the way, I've had nothing to eat since ten o'clock, and I
feel rather gone. Have you some cake around anywhere?"

"But we'll have supper in half an hour, and I've ordered waffles and
fried chicken for you. Hadn't you better wait?"

Her cheerfulness was not assumed now, for with the turn to practical
matters, she felt suddenly that the universe had righted itself. Even
Harry's departure was forgotten in the immediate necessity of providing
for his appetite.

"Well, I'll wait, but I hope you've prepared for an army. I could eat a
hundred waffles."

He snapped his jaws, and she laughed delightedly. For all his twenty-one
years, and the scholarship which he had won so easily and which was
taking him abroad, he was as boyish and as natural as he had been at
ten. Even his love of sweets had not lessened with the increase of his
dignity. To think of his demanding cake the minute after he had entered
the house!

"Father's play made a great hit," he said presently, still steering
carefully away from the reefs of emotion. "I suppose you read all about
it in the papers?"

She shook her head, smiling. Though she tried her best to be as natural
and as unemotional as he was, she could not keep her adoration out of
her eyes, which feasted on him like the eyes of one who had starved for
months. How handsome he was, with his broad shoulders, his fine
sunburned face, and his frank, boyish smile. It was a pity he had to
wear glasses--yet even his glasses seemed to her individual and
charming. She couldn't imagine a single way in which he could be
improved, and all the while she was perfectly sure that it wasn't in the
least because she was his mother--that she wasn't a bit prejudiced in
her judgment. It appeared out of the question that anybody--even a
stranger--could have found fault with him. "No, I haven't had time to
read the papers--I've been so busy getting ready for Lucy's wedding,"
she answered. "But your father told me about it. It must be
splendid--only I wish he wouldn't speak so contemptuously of it," she
added regretfully. "He says it's trash, and yet I'm sure everybody spoke
well of it, and they say it is obliged to make a great deal of money. I
can't understand why his success seems to irritate rather than please
him."

"Well, he thinks, you know, that it is only since he's cheapened himself
that he has had any hearing."

"Cheapened himself?" she repeated wistfully. "But his first plays failed
entirely, so these last ones must be a great deal better if they are
such splendid successes."

"Well, I suppose it's hard for us to understand his point of view. We
talked about it one night in New York when we were dining with Margaret
Oldcastle--she takes the leading part in 'Pretty Fanny,' you know."

"Yes, I know. What is she like?"

A strange, still look came into her face, as though she waited with
suspended breath for his answer.

"She's a charmer on the stage. I heard father tell her that she made the
play, and I'm not sure that he wasn't right."

"But you saw her off the stage, didn't you?"

"Oh, yes, she asked me to dinner. She didn't look nearly so young, then,
and she's not exactly pretty; but, somehow, it didn't seem to matter.
She's got genius--you couldn't be with her ten minutes without finding
out that. I never saw any one in my life so much alive. When she's in a
room, even if she doesn't speak, you can't keep your eyes off her. She's
like a bright flame that you can't stop looking at--not even if there
are a lot of prettier women there, too."

"Is she dark or fair?"

He stopped to think for a moment.

"To save my life I can't remember--but I think she's dark--at least, her
eyes are, though her hair may be light. But you never think of her
appearance when she's talking. I believe she's the best talker I ever
heard--better even than father."

His enthusiasm had got the better of him, and it was evident that
Oliver's success had banished for a time at least the secret hostility
which had existed between father and son. That passion for material
results, which could not be separated from the Treadwell spirit without
robbing that spirit of its vitality, had gradually altered the family
attitude toward Oliver's profession. Art, like business, must justify
itself by its results, and to a commercial age there could be no
justifiable results that could not bear translation into figures.
Success was the chief end of man, and success could be measured only in
terms of money.

"There's your father's step," said Virginia, whose face looked drawn and
pallid in the dusk. "Let me light the lamp, darling. He hates to read
his paper by anything but lamplight."

But he had jumped up before she had finished and was hunting for matches
in the old place under the clock on the mantelpiece. She was such a
little, thin, frail creature that he laughed as she tried to help him.

"So Lucy is going to marry that old rotter, is she?" he asked pleasantly
as his father entered. "Well, father! I was just asking mother why she
let Lucy marry that old rotter?"

"But the dear child has set her heart on him, and he is really very nice
to us," replied Virginia hurriedly. Though she was disappointed in
Lucy's choice, it seemed dreadful to her to speak of a man who was about
to enter the family as a "rotter."

"You stop it, Harry, if you have the authority. I haven't," answered
Oliver carelessly. "Is your neuralgia better, Virginia?"

"It's quite gone, dear. Doctor Powell gave me some aspirin and it cured
it." She smiled gratefully at him, with a touching pleasure in the fact
that he had remembered to ask. As she glanced quickly from father to
son, eager to see them reconciled, utterly forgetful of herself,
something of the anxious cheerfulness of Mrs. Pendleton's spirit
appeared to live again in her look. Though her freshness had withered,
she was still what is called "a sweet looking woman," and her
expression of simple goodness lent an appealing charm to her features.

"Are you going back to New York soon, father?" asked Harry, turning
politely in Oliver's direction. From his manner, which had lost its
boyishness, Virginia knew that he was trying with all his energy to be
agreeable, yet that he could not overcome the old feeling of constraint
and lack of sympathy.

"Next week. 'The Home' is to be put on in February, and I'm obliged to
be there for the rehearsals."

"Does Miss Oldcastle take the leading part?"

"Yes."

Crossing the room, Oliver held out his hands to the fire, and then
turning, stretched his arms, with a stifled yawn, above his head. The
only fault that could be urged against his appearance was that his
figure was becoming a trifle square, that he was beginning to look a
little too well-fed, a little too comfortable. For the rest, his hair,
which had gone quite grey, brought out the glow and richness of his
colour and lent a striking emphasis to his dark, shining eyes.

"Do you think that the new play is as good as 'Pretty Fanny'?" asked
Virginia.

"Well, they're both rot, you know," he answered, with a laugh.

"Oh, Oliver, how can you, when all the papers spoke so admiringly of
it?"

"Why shouldn't they? It is perfectly innocuous. The kind of thing any
father might take his daughter to see. We shan't dispute that, anyhow."

His flippancy not only hurt, it confused her. It was painful enough to
have him speak so slightingly of his success, but worse than this was
the feeling it aroused in her that he was defying authority. Even if her
innate respect for the printed word had not made her accept as final the
judgment of the newspapers, there was still the incontestable fact that
so many people had paid to see "Pretty Fanny" that both Oliver and Miss
Oldcastle had reaped a small fortune. She glanced in a helpless way at
Harry, and he said suddenly:

"Don't you think Jenny ought to come home to be with mother after Lucy
marries? You are obliged to go to New York so often that she will get
lonely."

"It's a good idea," agreed Oliver amiably, "but there's another case
where you'll have to use greater authority than mine. When I stopped
reforming people," he added gaily, "I began with my own family."

"The dear child would come in a minute if I suggested it," said
Virginia, "but she enjoys her life at college so much that I wouldn't
have her give it up for anything in the world. It would make me
miserable to think that any of my children made a sacrifice for me."

"You needn't worry. We've trained them differently," said Oliver, and
though his tone was slightly satirical, the satire was directed at
himself, not at his wife.

"I am sure it is what I should never want," insisted Virginia, almost
passionately, while she rose in response to the announcement of supper,
and met Lucy, in trailing pink chiffon, on the threshold.

"Are you sure your coat is warm enough, dear?" she asked. "Wouldn't you
like to wear my furs? They are heavier than yours."

"Oh, I'd love to, if you wouldn't mind, mother."

Raising herself on tiptoe, Lucy kissed Harry, and then ran to the
mirror, eager to see if the black fur looked well on her.

"They're just lovely on me, mother. I feel gorgeous!" she exclaimed
triumphantly, and indeed her charming girlish face rose like a white
flower out of the rich dark furs.

In Virginia's eyes, as she turned back in the doorway to watch her,
there was a radiant self-forgetfulness which illumined her features. For
a moment she lived so completely in her daughter's youth that her body
seemed to take warmth and colour from the emotion which transfigured
her.

"I am so glad, darling," she said. "It gives me more pleasure to see you
in them than it does to wear them myself." And though she did not know
it, she embodied her gentle philosophy of life in that single sentence.