THE RETURN


On a February morning five years later, Mrs. Pendleton, who was
returning from her daily trip to the market, met Susan Treadwell at the
corner of Old Street.

"You are coming up to welcome Jinny, aren't you, Susan?" she asked. "The
train gets in at four o'clock."

"Why, of course. I couldn't sleep a wink until I'd seen her. It has been
seven years, and it seems a perfect eternity."

"She hasn't changed much--at least she hadn't six months ago when I was
out there at the birth of her last baby. The little thing lived only two
hours, you know, and I thought at first his death would kill her."

"It was a great blow--but she has been fortunate never to have had a
day's sickness with the other three. I am dying to see them--especially
the eldest. That's your namesake, isn't it?"

"Yes, that's Lucy. She's six years old now, and as good as an angel, but
she hasn't fulfilled her promise of beauty. Virginia says she was the
prettiest baby she ever saw."

"Everybody says that Jenny, the youngest, is a perfect beauty."

"That's why her father makes so much of her, I reckon. I told him when I
was out there that he oughtn't to show such a difference between them.
Do you know, Susan, I wouldn't say it to anybody else, but I don't
believe Oliver has a real fondness for children. He gets tired of having
them always about, and that makes him impatient. Now, Virginia is a born
mother, just like her grandmother and all the women of our family."

"I should think Oliver would be crazy about the boy. He was named after
his father, too."

"Virginia felt she ought to name him Henry, but we call him Harry. No,
Oliver hardly ever takes any notice of him. I don't mean, of course,
that he isn't nice and kind to them--but he isn't wrapped up in them
heart and soul as Virginia is. I really believe he is more absorbed in
this play he has written than he is in the children."

"I am so glad to hear that two of his plays are going to be staged.
That's splendid, isn't it?"

"He is coming back to Dinwiddie because of it. Now that he is assured of
recognition, he says he is going to devote all his time to writing. Poor
fellow, he did so hate the work out at Matoaca City, though I must say
he was very faithful and persevering about it."

"You've taken that little house in Prince Street for them, where old
Miss Franklin used to live, haven't you? The last time I saw you, you
hadn't quite decided about it."

"I couldn't resist it because it is only three squares from the rectory.
Mr. Pendleton set his heart on it from the first minute."

"Well, I'm so glad," said Susan, shifting the small basket of fruit she
carried from one arm to the other, "and I'll certainly run in and see
them this evening--I suppose they'll be at the rectory for supper?"

"Why, no. Jinny said she couldn't bear to be away from the children the
first night, so we are all going there. I shall send Docia over to cook
supper before they get here, and I've just been to market to see if I
could find anything that Oliver would particularly like. He used to be
so fond of sweetbreads."

"Mr. Dewlap has some very nice ones. I got one for mother. She hasn't
been well for the last few days."

"I'm sorry to hear that. Give her my love and tell her I'll come down
just as soon as I get Jinny settled. I've been so taken up getting the
house ready that I haven't thought of another thing for three weeks."

"When will Oliver's play be put on in New York?" asked Susan, turning
back after they had parted.

"In three weeks. He is going back again for the last rehearsals. I wish
Jinny could go with him, but I don't believe she would spend a night
away from the children for anything on earth."

"Isn't it beautiful that her marriage has turned out so well?"

"Yes, I don't believe she could be any happier if she tried, and I must
say that Oliver makes a much better husband than I ever thought he
would. I never heard them disagree the whole time I was there. Of
course, Jinny gives up to him in everything except where the children
are concerned, but, then, a woman always expects to do that. One thing
I'm certain of--he couldn't have found a better wife if he'd searched
the world over. She never thinks of herself a minute, and you know how
fond she used to be of pretty clothes and of fixing herself up. Now,
she simply lives in Oliver and the children, and she is the proudest
thing of his plays! The rector says that she thinks he is Shakespeare
and Milton rolled into one."

"Nothing could be nicer," said Susan, "and it is all such a happy
surprise to me. Of course, I always thought Oliver very
attractive--everybody does--but he seemed to me to be selfish and
undisciplined, and I wasn't at all sure that Jinny was the kind of woman
to bring out the best in him."

"You'll think so when you see them together."

Then they smiled and parted, Mrs. Pendleton hurrying back to the little
house, while Susan turned down Old Street, in the direction of her home.
She walked rapidly, with an easy swinging pace seldom seen in the women
of Dinwiddie, and not heartily approved by the men. At twenty-seven she
was far handsomer than she had been at twenty, for her figure had grown
more shapely and her face had lost the look of intense preoccupation
which had once marred its charm. Strong, capable, conquering, she still
appeared; but in some subtle way she had grown softer. Mrs. Pendleton
would probably have said that she had "settled."

At the first corner she met John Henry on his way to the bank, and
turning, he walked with her to the end of the block, where they stood a
moment discussing Virginia's return.

"I've just been to attend to some bills," he explained; "that's why I'm
out at this hour. You never come into the bank now, I notice."

"Not often. Are you going to see Jinny this evening?"

"If you'll let me bring you home. I can't imagine Virginia with three
children, can you? I'm half afraid to see her again."

"You mean you think she may have changed? Mrs. Pendleton says not."

"Oh, that's Aunt Lucy all over. If Virginia had got as fat as Miss
Priscilla, she'd still believe she hadn't altered a particle."

"Well, she isn't fat, anyway. She weighs less than she ever did."

Her serious eyes dwelt on him under the green sunshade she held, and it
is possible that she wondered vaguely what it was about John Henry that
had made her love him unsought ever since she could remember. He was
certainly not handsome--though he was less stout and much better looking
than he used to be: he was not particularly clever, even if he was
successful with the work Cyrus had given him. She was under no delusion
concerning him (being a remarkably clear-sighted young person), yet she
knew that taking him just as he was, large, slow, kind, good, he aroused
in her a tenderness that was almost ridiculous. She had waited patiently
seven years for him to discover that he cared for her--a fact which had
been perfectly evident to her long before his duller wit had perceived
it.

"Do you want to be there to welcome Jinny?" he asked.

"I'd thought I'd go up about five, so I could get a glimpse of the
children before they are put to bed."

"Then I'll meet you there and bring you home. I wouldn't take anything
for meeting you, Susan. There's something about you that always cheers
me."

She met his eyes frankly. "Well, I'm glad of that," she replied in her
confident way, and held out her hand through the handle of the basket.
An instant later, when she passed on into Bolingbroke Street, there was
a smile on her face which made it almost pretty.

The front door was open, and as she entered the house her mother came
groping toward her out of the close-smelling dusk of the hall.

"I thought you'd never get back, Susan. I've had such a funny feeling."

"What kind of feeling, mother? It must be just nervousness. Here are
some beautiful grapes I've brought you."

"I wish you wouldn't leave me alone. I don't like to be left alone."

"Well, I don't leave you any more than I'm obliged to, but if I stay
shut up here I feel as if I'd smother. I've asked Miss Willy to come and
sit with you this evening while I run up to welcome Virginia."

"Is she coming back? Nobody told me. Nobody tells me anything."

"But I did tell you. Why, we've been talking about it for weeks. You
must have forgotten."

"I shouldn't have forgotten it. I'm sure I shouldn't have forgotten it
if you had told me. But you keep everything from me. You are just like
your father. You and James are both just like your father." Her voice
had grown peevish, and an expression of fury distorted her usually
passive features.

"Why, mother, what in the world is the matter?" asked Susan, startled by
her manner. "Come upstairs and lie down. I don't believe you are well.
You didn't eat a morsel of breakfast, so I'm going to fix you a nice
little lunch. I got you a beautiful sweetbread from Mr. Dewlap."

Putting her arm about her, she led her up the long flight of steps to
her room, where Mrs. Treadwell, pacified by the attention, began
immediately to doze on the chintz-covered couch by the window.

"I don't see what on earth ever made me marry your father, Susan," she
said, starting up half an hour later, when her daughter appeared with
the tray. "Everybody knew the Treadwells couldn't hold a candle to my
family."

"I wouldn't worry about that now, mother," replied Susan briskly, while
she placed the tray on a little table at the head of the couch. "Sit up
and eat these oysters."

"I'm obliged to worry over it," returned Mrs. Treadwell irritably, while
she watched her daughter arrange her plate and pour out the green tea
from the little Rebecca-at-the-well teapot. "I don't see what got into
my head and made me do it. Why, his branch of the Treadwells had petered
out until they were as common as dirt."

"Well, it's too late to mend matters, so we'd better turn in and try to
make the best of them." She held out an oyster on the end of a fork, and
her mother received and ate it obediently.

"If I could only once understand why I did it, I think I could rest
easier, Susan."

"Perhaps you were in love with each other. I've heard of such a thing."

"Well, if I was going to fall in love, I reckon I could have found
somebody better to fall in love with," retorted Mrs. Treadwell with the
same strange excitement in her manner. Then she took up her knife and
fork and began to eat her luncheon with relish.

At five o'clock that afternoon, when Susan reached the house in Prince
Street, Virginia, with her youngest child in her arms, was just stepping
out of a dilapidated "hack," from which a grinning negro driver handed a
collection of lunch baskets into the eager hands of the rector and Mrs.
Pendleton, who stood on the pavement.

"Here's Susan!" called Mrs. Pendleton in her cheerful voice, rather as
if she feared her daughter would overlook her friend in the excitement
of homecoming.

"Oh, you darling Susan!" exclaimed Virginia, kissing her over the head
of a sleeping child in her arms. "This is Jenny--poor little thing, she
hasn't been able to keep her eyes open. Don't you think she is the
living image of our Saint Memin portrait of great-grandmamma?"

"She's a cherub," said Susan. "Let me look at you first, Jinny. I want
to see if you've changed."

"Well, you can't expect me to look exactly as I did before I had four
babies!" returned Virginia with a happy laugh. She was thinner, and
there were dark circles of fatigue from the long journey under her eyes,
but the Madonna-like possibilities in her face were fulfilled, and it
seemed to Susan that she was, if anything, lovelier than before. The
loss of her girlish bloom was forgotten in the expression of love and
goodness which irradiated her features. She wore a black cloth skirt,
and a blouse of some ugly blue figured silk finished at the neck with
the lace scarf Susan had sent her at Christmas. Her hat was a
characterless black straw trimmed with a bunch of yellow daisies; and
by its shape alone, Susan discerned that Virginia had ceased to consider
whether or not her clothes were becoming. But she shone with an air of
calm and radiant happiness in which all trivial details were
transfigured as by a flood of light.

"This is Lucy. She is six years old, and to think that she has never
seen her dear Aunt Susan," said Virginia, while she pulled forward the
little girl who was shyly clinging to her skirt. "And the other is
Harry. Marthy, bring Harry here and let him speak to Miss Susan. He is
nearly four, and so big for his age. Where is Harry, Marthy?"

"He's gone into the yard, ma'am, I couldn't keep him back," said Marthy.
"As soon as he caught sight of that pile of bricks he wanted to begin
building."

"Well, we'll go, too," replied Virginia. "That child is simply crazy
about building. Has Oliver paid the driver, mother? And what has become
of him? Susan, have you spoken to Oliver?"

No, Susan hadn't, but as they turned, he appeared on the porch and came
eagerly forward. Her first impression was that he had grown handsomer
than she had ever believed possible; and the next minute she asked
herself how in the world he had managed to exercise his vitality in
Matoaca City. He was one of those men, she saw, in whom the spirit of
youth burned like a flame. Every year would pass as a blessing, not as a
curse, to him, and already, because of her intenser emotions and her
narrower interests, Virginia was beginning to look older than he. There
was a difference, too, in their dress, for he had the carefully groomed
and well-brushed appearance so rare in Dinwiddie, while Virginia's
clothes might have been worn, with equal propriety, by Miss Priscilla
Batte. She was still lovely, but it was a loveliness, Susan felt with a
pang, that would break early.

"Why, there's Susan!" exclaimed Oliver, coming toward her with an eager
pleasure in his face which made it more boyish than ever. "Well, well,
it's good to see you, Susan. Are you the same old dear I left behind
me?"

"The same," said Susan laughing. "And so glad about your plays, Oliver,
so perfectly delighted."

"By Jove, you're the first person to speak of them," he replied. "Nobody
else seems to think a play is worth mentioning as long as a baby is in
sight. That's a delusion of Virginia's, too. I wish you'd convince her,
Susan, that a man is of some use except as a husband and a father."

"But they are such nice babies, Oliver."

"Oh, nice enough as babies go. The boy's a trump. He'd be a man already
if his mother would let him. But babies ought to have their season like
everything else under the sun. For God's sake, Susan, talk to me about
something else!" he added in mock despair.

Virginia was already in the house, and when Oliver and Susan joined her,
they found Mrs. Pendleton trying to persuade her to let Marthy carry the
sleeping Jenny up to the nursery.

"Give me that child, Jinny," said Oliver, a trifle sharply. "You know
the doctor told you not to carry her upstairs."

"But I'm sure it won't hurt me," she responded, with an angelic
sweetness of voice. "It will wake her to be changed, and the poor
little thing has had such a trying day."

"Well, you aren't going to carry her, if she wakes twenty times,"
retorted Oliver. "Here, Marthy, if she thinks I'd drop her, suppose you
try it."

"Why, bless you, sir, I can take her so she won't know it," returned
Marthy reassuringly, and coming forward, she proved her ability by
sliding the unconscious child from Virginia's arms into her own.

"Where is Harry?" asked Mrs. Pendleton anxiously. "Nobody has seen Harry
since we got here."

"I is, ma'am," replied the cheerful Marthy over her shoulder, as she
toiled up the stairs, with Virginia and little Lucy noiselessly
following. "I've undressed him and I was obliged to hide his clothes to
keep him from putting 'em on again. He's near daft with excitement."

"Perhaps I'd better go up and help get them to bed," said Mrs.
Pendleton, turning from the rector to Oliver. "I'm afraid Jinny will be
too tired to enjoy her supper. Harry is in such a gale of spirits I can
hear him talking."

"You might as well, my dear," rejoined the rector mildly, as he stooped
over to replace one of the baby's bottles in the basket from which it
had slipped. "Don't you think we might get some of these things out of
the way?" he added. "If you take that alcohol stove, Oliver, I'll follow
with these caps and shawls."

"Certainly, sir," rejoined Oliver readily. He always addressed the
rector as "sir," partly because it seemed to him to be appropriate,
partly because he knew that the older man expected him to do so. It was
one of Oliver's most engaging characteristics that he usually adapted
himself with perfect ease to whatever life or other people expected of
him.

While they were carrying the baskets into the passage at the back of the
dining-room, Mrs. Pendleton, whose nervous longing had got at last
beyond her control, deserted Susan, with an apology, and flitted up the
stairs.

"Come up and tell Jinny good-night before you go, dear," she added; "I'm
afraid she will not get down again to see you."

"Oh, don't worry about me," replied Susan. "I want to say a few words to
Oliver, and then I'm coming up to see Harry. Harry appears to me to be a
man of personality."

"He's a darling child," replied Mrs. Pendleton, a little vaguely, "and
Jinny says she never saw him so headstrong before. He is usually as good
as gold."

"Well, well, it's a fine family," said the rector, beaming upon his
son-in-law, when they returned from the passage. "I never saw three
healthier children. It's a pity you lost the other one," he added in a
graver tone, "but as he lived such a short time, Virginia couldn't take
it so much to heart as if he had been older. She seems to have got over
the disappointment."

"Yes, I think she's got over it," said Oliver.

"It will be good for her to be back in Dinwiddie. I never felt satisfied
to think of her so far away."

"Yes, I'm glad we could come back," agreed Oliver pleasantly, though he
appeared to Susan's quick eye to be making an effort.

"By the way, I haven't spoken of your literary work," remarked the
rector, with the manner of a man who is saying something very agreeable.
"I have never been to the theatre, but I understand that it is losing a
great deal of its ill odour. I always remember when anything is said
about the stage that, after all, Shakespeare was an actor. We may be
old-fashioned in Dinwiddie," he pursued in the complacent tone in which
the admission of this failing is invariably made, "but I don't think we
can have any objection to sweet, clean plays, with an elevating moral
tone to them. They are no worse, anyway, than novels."

Though Oliver kept his face under such admirable control, Susan,
glancing at him quickly, saw a shade of expression, too fine for
amusement, too cordial for resentment, pass over his features. His
colour, which was always high, deepened, and raising his head, he
brushed the smooth dark hair back from his forehead. Through some
intuitive strain of sympathy, Susan understood, while she watched him,
that his plays were as vital a matter in his life as the children were
in Virginia's.

"I must run up and see Harry before he goes to sleep," she said, feeling
instinctively that the conversation was becoming a strain.

At the allusion to his grandson, the rector's face lost immediately its
expression of forced pleasantness and relapsed into its look of genial
charm.

"You ought to be proud of that boy, Oliver," he observed, beaming.
"There's the making of a fine man in him, but you mustn't let Jinny
spoil him. It took all my strength and authority to keep Lucy from
ruining Jinny, and I've always said that my brother-in-law Tom Bland
would have been a first-rate fellow if it hadn't been for the way his
mother raised him. God knows, I like a woman to be wrapped up heart and
soul in her household--and I don't suppose anybody ever accused the true
Southern lady of lacking in domesticity--but if they have a failing,
which I refuse to admit, it is that they are almost too soft-hearted
where their children--especially their sons--are concerned."

"I used to tell Virginia that she gave in to Harry too much when he was
a baby," said Oliver, who was evidently not without convictions
regarding the rearing of his offspring; "but she hasn't been nearly so
bad about it since Jenny came. Jenny is the one I'm anxious about now.
She is a headstrong little beggar and she has learned already how to get
around her mother when she wants anything. It's been worse, too," he
added, "since we lost the last poor little chap. Ever since then
Virginia has been in mortal terror for fear something would happen to
the others."

"It was hard on her," said the rector. "We men can't understand how
women feel about a thing like that, though," he added gently. "I
remember when we lost our babies--you know we had three before Virginia
came, but none of them lived more than a few hours--that I thought Lucy
would die of grief and disappointment. You see they have all the burden
and the anxiety of it, and I sometimes think that a child begins to live
for a woman a long time before a man ever thinks of it as a human
being."

"I suppose you're right," returned Oliver in the softened tone which
proved to Susan that he was emotionally stirred. "I tried to be as
sympathetic with Virginia as I could, but--do you know?--I stopped to
ask myself sometimes if I could really understand. It seemed to her so
strange that I wasn't knocked all to pieces by the thing--that I could
go on writing as if nothing had happened."

"I am not sure that it isn't beyond the imagination of a man to enter
into a woman's most sacred feeling," remarked the rector, with a touch
of the sentimentality in which he religiously shrouded the feminine sex.
So ineradicable, indeed, was his belief in the inherent virtue of every
woman, that he had several times fallen a helpless victim in the
financial traps of conscienceless Delilahs. But since his innocence was
as temperamental a quality as was Virginia's maternal passion,
experience had taught him nothing, and the fact that he had been
deceived in the past threw no shadow of safeguard around his steps in
the present. This endearing trait, which made him so successful as a
husband, was probably the cause of his unmitigated failure as a
reformer. In looking at a woman, it was impossible for him to see
anything except perfection.

When Susan reached the top of the staircase, Mrs. Pendleton called to
her, through the half open door of the nursery, to come in and hear how
beautifully Lucy was saying her prayers. Her voice was full of a
suppressed excitement; there was a soft pink flush in her cheeks; and it
seemed to Susan that the presence of her grandchildren had made her
almost a girl again. She sat on the edge of a trundle-bed slipping a
nightgown over the plump shoulders of little Lucy, who held herself very
still and prim, for she was a serious child, with a natural taste for
propriety. Her small plain face, with its prominent features and pale
blue eyes, had a look of intense earnestness and concentration, as
though the business of getting to bed absorbed all her energies; and the
only movement she made was to toss back the slender and very tight
braid of brown hair from her shoulders. She said her prayer as if it
were the multiplication table, and having finished, slid gently into
bed, and held up her face to be kissed.

"Jenny wouldn't drink but half of her bottle, Miss Virginia," said
Marthy, appearing suddenly on the threshold of Virginia's bedroom, for
the youngest child slept in the room with her mother. "She dropped off
to sleep so sound that I couldn't wake her."

"I hope she isn't sick, Marthy," responded Virginia in an anxious tone.
"Did she seem at all feverish?"

"Naw'm, she ain't feverish, she's jest sleepy headed."

"Well, I'll come and look at her as soon as I can persuade Harry to
finish his prayers. He stopped in the middle of them, and he refuses to
bless anybody but himself."

She spoke gravely, gazing with her exhaustless patience over the impish
yellow head of Harry, who knelt, in his little nightgown, on the rug at
her feet. His roving blue eyes met Susan's as she came over to him,
while his chubby face broke into a delicious smile.

"Don't notice him, Susan," said Virginia, in her lovely voice which was
as full of tenderness and as lacking in humour as her mother's. "Harry,
you shan't speak to Aunt Susan until you've been good and finished your
prayers."

"Don't want to speak to Aunt Susan," retorted the monster of infant
depravity, slipping his bare toes through a rent in the rug, and
doubling up with delight at his insubordination.

"I never knew him to behave like this before," said Virginia, almost in
tears from shame and weariness. "It must be the excitement of getting
here. He is usually so good. Now, Harry, begin all over again. 'God
bless dear papa, God bless dear mamma, God bless dear grandmamma, God
bless dear grandpapa, God bless dear Lucy, God bless dear Jenny, God
bless all our dear friends.'"

"God bless dear Harry," recited the monster.

"He has gone on like that ever since I started," said poor Virginia. "I
don't know what to do about it. It seems dreadful to let him go to bed
without saying his prayers properly. Now, Harry, please, please be good;
poor mother is so tired, and she wants to go and kiss little Jenny
good-night. 'God bless dear papa,' and I'll let you get in bed."

"God bless Harry," was the imperturbable rejoinder to this pleading.

"Don't you want your poor mother to have some supper, Harry?" inquired
Susan severely.

"Harry wants supper," answered the innocent.

"I suppose I'll have to let him go," said Virginia, distractedly, "but
Oliver will be horrified. He says I don't reason with them enough.
Harry," she concluded sternly, "don't you understand that it is naughty
of you to behave this way and keep mamma away from poor little Jenny?"

"Bad Jenny," said Harry.

"If you don't say your prayers this minute, you shan't have any
preserves on your bread to-morrow."

"Bad preserves," retorted Harry.

"Well, if he won't, I don't see how I can make him," said Virginia.
"Come, then, get into bed, Harry, and go to sleep. You have been a bad
boy and hurt poor mamma's feelings so that she is going to cry. She
won't be able to eat her supper for thinking of the way you have
disobeyed her."

Jumping into bed with a bound, Harry dug his head into the pillows,
gurgled, and then sat up very straight.

"God bless dear papa, God bless dear mamma, God bless dear grandmamma,
God bless dear grandpapa, God bless dear Lucy, God bless dear Jenny, God
bless our dear friends everywhere," he repeated in a resounding voice.

"Oh, you precious lamb!" exclaimed Virginia. "He couldn't bear to hurt
poor mamma, could he?" and she kissed him ecstatically before hastening
to the slumbering Jenny in the adjoining room.

"I like the little scamp," said Susan, when she reported the scene to
John Henry on the way home, "but he manages his mother perfectly.
Already his sense of humour is better developed than hers."

"I can't get over seeing Virginia with children," observed John Henry,
as if the fact of Virginia's motherhood had just become evident to him.
"It suits her, though. She looked happier than I ever saw her--and so,
for that matter, did Aunt Lucy."

"It made me wonder how Mrs. Pendleton had lived away from them for seven
years. Why, you can't imagine what she is--she doesn't seem to have any
life at all until you see her with Virginia's children."

"It's a wonderful thing," said John Henry slowly, "and it taught me a
lot just to look at them. I don't know why, but it seemed to make me
understand how much I care about you, Susan."

"Hadn't you suspected it before?" asked Susan as calmly as he had
spoken. Emotionalism, she knew, she would never find in John Henry's
wooing, and, though she could not have explained the reason of it to
herself, she liked the brusque directness of his courtship. It was part
of that large sincerity of nature which had first attracted her to him.

"Of course, in a way I knew I cared more for you than for anybody
else--but I didn't realize that you were more to me than Virginia had
ever been. I had got so in the habit of thinking I was in love with her
that it came almost as a surprise to me to find that it was over."

"I knew it long ago," said Susan.

"Why didn't you make me see it?"

"Oh, I waited for you to find it out yourself. I was sure that you would
some day."

"Do you think you could ever care for me, Susan?"

A smile quivered on Susan's lips as she looked up at him, but with the
reticence which had always characterized her, she answered simply:

"I think I could, John Henry."

His hand reached down and closed over hers, and in the long look which
they exchanged under the flickering street lamp, she felt suddenly that
perfect security which is usually the growth of happy years. Whatever
the future brought to them, she knew that she could trust John Henry's
love for her.

"And we've lost seven years, dearest," he said, with a catch in his
voice. "We've lost seven years just because I happened to be born a
fool."

"But we've got fifty ahead of us," she replied with a joyous laugh.

As she spoke, her heart cried out, "Fifty years of the thing I want!"
and she looked up into the kind, serious face of John Henry as if it
were the face of incarnate happiness. A tremendous belief in life
surged from her brain through her body, which felt incredibly warm and
young. She thought exultantly of herself as of one who did not accept
destiny, but commanded it.

They walked the rest of the way in silence, but he held her hand pressed
closely against his heart, and once or twice he turned in the deserted
street and looked into her eyes as if he found there all the words that
he needed.

"We won't waste any more time, will we, Susan?" he asked when they
reached the house. "Let's be married in December."

"If mother is better by then. She hasn't been well, and I am anxious
about her."

"We'll go to housekeeping at once. I'll begin looking about to-morrow.
God bless you, darling, for what you are giving me."

She caressed his hand gently with her fingers, and he was about to speak
again, when the door behind them opened and the head of Cyrus appeared
like that of a desolate bird of prey.

"Is that you, Susan?" he inquired. "Where have you been all this time?
Your mother was taken ill more than an hour ago, and the doctor says
that she has been paralyzed."

Breaking away from John Henry, Susan ran up the steps and past her
father into the hall, where Miss Willy stood weeping.

"I was all by myself with her. There wasn't another living soul in the
house," sobbed the little dressmaker. "She fell over just like that,
with her face all twisted, while I was talking to her."

"Oh, poor mother, poor mother!" cried the girl as she ran upstairs. "Is
she in her room, and who is with her?"

"The doctor has been there for over an hour, and he says that she'll
never be able to move again. Oh, Susan, how will she stand it?"

But Susan had already outstripped her, and was entering the sick-room,
where Mrs. Treadwell lay unconscious, with her distorted face turned
toward the door, as though she were watching expectantly for some one
who would never come. As the girl fell on her knees beside the couch,
her happiness seemed to dissolve like mist before the grim facts of
mortal anguish and death. It was not until dawn, when the night's watch
was over and she stood alone beside her window, that she said to herself
with all the courage she could summon:

"And it's over for me, too. Everything is over for me, too. Oh, poor,
poor mother!"

Love, which had seemed to her last night the supreme spirit in the
universe, had surrendered its authority to the diviner image of Duty.