THE WILL TO LIVE


"It's all horrid talk. There's not a word of truth in it," she thought,
true to the Pendleton point of view, as she turned into Old Street on
her way to the Treadwells'. Then the sound of horses' hoofs rang on the
cobblestones, and, looking past the corner, she saw Oliver and Abby
galloping under the wine-coloured leaves of the oak tree at the
crossing. His face was turned back, as if he were looking over his
shoulder at the red sunset, and he was laughing as she had not heard him
laugh since that dreadful morning in the bedroom of the New York hotel.
What a boy he was still! As she watched him, it seemed to her that she
was old enough to be his mother, and the soreness in her heart changed
into an exquisite impulse of tenderness. Then he looked from the sunset
to Abby, and at the glance of innocent pleasure that passed between them
a stab of jealousy entered her heart like a blade. Before it faded, they
had passed the corner, and were cantering wildly up Old Street in the
direction of Abby's home.

"It is my fault. I am too settled. I am letting my youth go," she said,
with a passionate determination to catch her girlhood and hold it fast
before it eluded her forever. "I am only twenty-eight and I dress like a
woman of forty." And it seemed to her that the one desirable thing in
life was this fleet-winged spirit of youth, which passed like a breath,
leaving existence robbed of all romance and beauty. An hour before she
had not cared, and she would not care now if only Oliver could grow
middle-aged and old at the moment when she did. Ah, there was the
tragedy! All life was for men, and only a few radiant years of it were
given to women. Men were never too old to love, to pursue and capture
whatever joy the fugitive instant might hold for them. But women, though
they were allowed only one experience out of the whole of life, were
asked to resign even that one at the very minute when they needed it
most. "I wonder what will become of me when the children grow big enough
to be away all the time as Oliver is," she thought wistfully. "I wish
one never grew too old to have babies."

The front door of the Treadwell house stood open, and in the hall Susan
was arranging golden-rod and life-ever-lasting in a blue china bowl.

"Of course, you may have Belle to-morrow," she said in answer to
Virginia's faltering request. "Even if I intended going, I'd be only too
glad to lend her to you--but I can't leave mother anyway. She always
gets restless if I stay out over an hour."

Mrs. Treadwell's illness had become one of those painful facts which
people accept as naturally as they accept the theological dogma of
damnation. It was terrible, when they thought of it, but they seldom
thought of it, thereby securing tranquillity of mind in the face of both
facts and dogmas. Even Virginia had ceased to make her first question
when she met Susan, "How is your mother?"

"But, Susan, you need the exercise. I thought that was why the doctor
made Uncle Cyrus get you a horse."

"It was, but I only go for an hour in the afternoon. I begrudge every
minute I spend away from mother. Oh, Jinny, she is so pathetic! It
almost breaks my heart to watch her."

"I know, dearest," said Virginia; but at the back of her brain she was
thinking, "They looked so happy together, yet he could never really
admire Abby. She isn't at all the kind of woman he likes."

So preoccupied was she by this problem of her own creation, that her
voice had a strangely far off sound, as though it came from a distance.
"I wish I could help you, dear Susan. If you ever want me, day or night,
you know you have only to send for me. I'd let nothing except desperate
illness stand in the way of my coming."

It was true, and because she knew that it was true, Susan stooped
suddenly and kissed her.

"You are looking tired, Jinny. What is the matter?"

"Nothing except that I'm a sight in this old waist. I made it over to
save buying one, but I wish now I hadn't. It makes me look so settled."

"You need some clothes, and you used to be so fond of them."

"That was before the children came. I've never cared much since. It's
just as if life were a completed circle, somehow. There's nothing more
to expect or to wait for--you'll understand what I mean some day,
Susan."

"I think I do now. But only women are like that? Men are different----"

It was the classic phrase again, but on Susan's lips it sounded with a
new significance.

"And some women are different, too," replied Virginia. "Now there's Abby
Goode--Susan, what do you honestly think of Abby?"

There was a wistful note in the question, and around her gentle blue
eyes appeared a group of little lines, brought out by the nervous
contraction of her forehead. Was it the wan, smoky light of the
dusk?--Susan wondered, or was Virginia really beginning to break so
soon?

"Why, I like Abby. I always did," she answered, trying to look as if she
did not understand what Virginia had meant. "She's a little bit what
John Henry calls 'loud,' but she has a good heart and would do anybody a
kindness."

She had evaded answering, just as Virginia had evaded asking, the
question which both knew had passed unuttered between them--was Abby to
be trusted to keep inviolate the ancient unwritten pledge of honourable
womanhood? Her character was being tested by the single decisive virtue
exacted of her sex.

"I am glad you feel that way," said Virginia in a relieved manner after
a minute, "because I should hate not to believe in Abby, and some people
don't understand her manner--mother among them."

"Oh, she's all right. I'm sure of it," answered Susan, with heartiness.

The wistful sound had passed out of Virginia's voice, while the little
lines faded as suddenly from the corners of her eyes. She looked better
already--only she really ought not to wear such dowdy clothes, even
though she was happily married, reflected Susan, as she watched her, a
few minutes later, pass over the mulberry leaves, which lay, thick and
still, on the sidewalk.

At the corner of Sycamore Street a shopkeeper was putting away his goods
for the night, and in the window Virginia saw a length of hyacinth-blue
silk, matching her eyes, which she had remotely coveted for weeks--never
expecting to possess it, yet never quite reconciling herself to the
thought that it might be worn by some other woman. That length of silk
had grown gradually to symbolize the last glimmer of girlish vanity
which motherhood had not extinguished in her heart; and while she looked
at it now, in her new recklessness of mood, a temptation, born of the
perversity which rules human fate, came to her to go in and buy it while
she was still desperate enough to act foolishly and not be afraid. For
the first time in her life that immemorial spirit of adventure which
lies buried under the dead leaves of civilization at the bottom of every
human heart--with whose re-arisen ghost men have moved mountains and
ploughed jungles and charted illimitable seas--this imperishable spirit
stirred restlessly in its grave and prompted her for once to be
uncalculating and to risk the future. In the flickering motive which
guided her as she entered the shop, one would hardly have recognized the
lusty impulse which had sent her ancestors on splendid rambles of
knight-errantry, yet its hidden source was the same. The simple purchase
of twelve yards of blue silk which she had wanted for weeks! To an
outsider it would have appeared a small matter, yet in the act there was
the intrepid struggle of a personal will to enforce its desire upon
destiny. She would win back the romance and the beauty of living at the
cost of prudence, at the cost of practical comforts, at the cost, if
need be, of those ideals of womanly duty to which the centuries had
trained her! For eight years she had hardly thought of herself, for
eight years she had worked and saved and planned and worried, for eight
years she had given her life utterly and entirely to Oliver and the
children--and the result was that he was happier with Abby--with Abby
whom he didn't even admire--than he was with the wife whom he both
respected and loved! The riddle not only puzzled, it enraged her. Though
she was too simple to seek a psychological answer, the very fact that it
existed became an immediate power in her life. She forgot the lateness
of the evening, she forgot the children who were anxiously watching for
her return. The forces of character, which she had always regarded as
divinely fixed and established, melted and became suddenly fluid. She
wasn't what she had been the minute before--she wasn't even, she began
dimly to realize, what she would probably be the minute afterwards. Yet
the impulse which governed her now was as despotic as if it had reigned
in undisputed authority since the day of her birth. She knew that it was
a rebel against the disciplined and moderate rule of her conscience, but
this knowledge, which would have horrified her had she been in a normal
mood, aroused in her now merely a breathless satisfaction at the
spectacle of her own audacity. The natural Virginia had triumphed for an
instant over the Virginia whom the ages had bred.

At home she found Oliver waiting for supper, and the three children in
tears for fear she should decide to stay out forever.

"Oh, mother, we thought you'd gone away never to come back," sobbed
Lucy, throwing herself into her arms, "and what would little Jenny have
done?"

"Where in the world have you been, Virginia?" asked Oliver, a trifle
impatiently, for he was not used to having her absent from the house at
meal hours. "I was afraid somebody had been taken ill at the rectory, so
I went around to inquire."

"No, nobody was ill," answered Virginia quietly. Though her resolution
made her tremble all over, it did not occur to her for an instant that
even now she might recede from it. As the rector had gone to the war, so
she was going now to battle with Abby. She was afraid, but that quality
which had made the Pendletons despise fear since the beginning of
Dinwiddie's history, which they had helped to make, enabled her to
control her quivering muscles and to laugh at the reproachful protests
with which the children surrounded her. Through her mind there shot the
thought: "I have a secret from Oliver," and she felt suddenly guilty
because for the first time since her marriage she was keeping something
back from him. Then, following this, there came the knowledge, piercing
her heart, that she must keep her secret because even if she told him,
he would not understand. With the casualness of a man's point of view
towards an emotion, he would judge its importance, she felt, chiefly by
the power it possessed of disturbing the course of his life.
Unobservant, and ever ready to twist and decorate facts as she was, it
had still been impossible for her to escape the truth that men are by
nature incapable of a woman's characteristic passion for nursing
sentiment. To struggle to keep a feeling alive for no better reason than
that it was a feeling, would appear as wastefully extravagant to Oliver
as to the unimaginative majority of his sex. Such pure, sublime,
uncalculating folly belonged to woman alone!

When, at last, supper was over and the children were safely in bed, she
came downstairs to Oliver, who was smoking a cigar over a newspaper, and
asked carelessly:

"At what time do you start in the morning?"

"I'd like to be up by five," he replied, without lowering his paper.
"We're to meet the hounds at Croswell's store at a quarter of six, so
I'll have to get off by five at the latest. I wanted my horse fresh for
to-morrow, that's why I only went a mile or two this afternoon," he
added.

"Susan's to lend me Belle. I'm going with you," she said, after a pause
in which he had begun to read his paper again. This habit of treating
her as if she were not present when he wanted to read or to work, was,
she remembered, one of the things she had insisted upon in the beginning
of her marriage.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed, and the paper dropped from his hands. "I'm
jolly glad, but what will you do about the children?"

"Mother is coming to look after them. I'll be back in time to hear
Harry's lessons, I suppose."

"Why, of course; but, look here, you'll be awfully sore. You haven't
ridden after the hounds since I knew you. You might even get a fall."

"I used to go, though, a great deal--and it won't hurt me to be stiff
for a few days. Besides, I want to take up hunting again."

Her motive was beyond him--perhaps because of her nearness, which
prevented his getting the proper perspective of vision. For all his
keenness of insight, he failed utterly to see into the mysterious mind
of his wife. He could not penetrate that subtle interplay of traditional
virtues and discover that she was in the clutch of one of the oldest and
most savage of the passions.

"Then you'd better go to bed early and get some sleep," he said. "I
suppose we'll have a cup of coffee before starting."

"I'll make it on the oil stove while I am dressing. Marthy won't be up
then."

"Well, I'll come upstairs in ten minutes," he replied, taking up his
paper again. "I only want to finish this article."

In the morning when she opened the old green shutters and looked out of
the window, the horses, having been saddled by candlelight, were
standing under the mulberry tree at the gate. Eight years ago, in her
girlhood, she would have awakened in a delicious excitement on the
morning of a fox-hunt, and have dressed as eagerly as if she were going
to a ball; but to-day, while she lit the oil-stove in the hall room and
put on the kettle of water, she was supported not by the hope of
pleasure, but by a dull, an almost indefinable sensation of dread. The
instinct of woman to adjust her personality to the changing ideals of
the man she loves--this instinct older than civilization, rooted in
tragedy, and existing by right of an unconquerable necessity--rose
superior at the moment to that more stable maternal passion with which
it has conflicted since the beginning of motherhood. While she put on
her riding-habit and tied up the plait of her hair, the one thought in
Virginia's mind was that she must be, at all costs, the kind of woman
that Oliver wanted.

A little later, when they set out under the mulberry trees, she glanced
at him wistfully, as though she wanted him to praise the way she looked
in the saddle. But his eyes were on the end of the street, where a
little company of riders awaited them, and before she could ask a
question, Abby's high voice was heard exclaiming pleasantly upon her
presence. Not a particularly imposing figure, because of her rather
short legs, when she was on the ground, it was impossible for Virginia
to deny that Abby was amazingly handsome on horseback. Plump, dark, with
a superb bosom, and a colour in her cheeks like autumnal berries, she
had never appeared to better advantage than she did, sitting on her
spirited bay mare under an arch of scarlet leaves which curved over her
head. Turning at their approach, she started at a brisk canter up the
road, and as Virginia followed her, the sound of the horn floated, now
loud, now faint, out of the pale mist that spun fanciful silken webs
over the trees and bushes.

"Remember to look out for the creeks. That's where the danger comes,"
said Oliver, riding close to her, and he added nervously, "Don't try to
keep up with Abby."

Ahead of them stretched a deserted Virginia road, with its look of
brooding loneliness, as if it had waited patiently through the centuries
for a civilization which had never come; and on the right of it, beyond
a waste of scarlet sumach and sassafras and a winding creek screened in
elder bushes, the dawn was breaking slowly under a single golden-edged
cloud. Somebody on Virginia's left--a large, raw-boned, passionate
huntsman, in an old plum-coloured overcoat with a velvet collar--was
complaining loudly that they had started too late and the fox would have
gone to his lair before they reached the main party. Except for an oath,
which he rapped out by way of an emphasis not intended for the ladies,
he might have been conducting a religious revival, so solemnly
energetic, so deeply moved, was his manner. The hunt, which observed
naturally the characteristics of a society that was ardently
individualistic even in its sports, was one of those informal,
"go-as-you-please" affairs in which the supreme joy of killing is not
hampered by tedious regulations or unnecessary restrictions. The chief
thing was to get a run--to start a rare red fox, if luck was good,
because he was supposed to run straight by nature and not to move in
circles after the inconsiderate manner of the commoner grey sort. But
Providence, being inattentive to the needs of hunters in the
neighbourhood of Dinwiddie, had decreed that the red fox should live
there mainly in the vivid annals of old sportsmen.

"A grey fox with red ears. The best run I ever had. Tried to get in the
crotch of a hickory tree at the end. Was so exhausted he couldn't stir a
foot when the hounds got him." While they waited at the crossroads
before a little country store, where the pack of hounds, lean, cringing,
habitually hungry creatures, started from beneath an old field pine on
the right, Virginia heard the broken phrases blown on the wind, which
carried the joyous notes of the horn over the meadows. The casual
cruelty of the words awoke no protest in her mind, because it was a
cruelty to which she was accustomed. If the sport had been unknown in
Dinwiddie, and she had read of it as the peculiar activity of the
inhabitants of the British Islands, she would probably have condemned it
as needlessly brutal and degrading. But with that universal faculty of
the human mind to adjust its morality to fit its inherited physical
habits, she regarded "the rights of the fox" to-day with something of
the humorous scorn of sentimental rubbish with which her gentler
grandmother had once regarded "the rights of the slave." For centuries
the hunt had been one of the cherished customs of Dinwiddians; and
though she could not bear to see a fly caught in a web, it would never
have occurred to her to question the humanity of any sport in which her
ancestors had delighted. In her girlhood the sound of the horn had
called to her blood with all the intoxicating associations it awoke in
the raw-boned, energetic rider in the plum-coloured coat--but to-day
both the horn and the familiar landscape around her had grown strange
and unhomelike. For the first time since her birth she and the country
were out of harmony.

In the midst of the hounds, in the centre of the old field on the right,
the huntsman, who was at the same time master and owner of the dogs,
brandished a long raw-hide whip, flexible from the handle, which was
pleasantly known in Dinwiddie as a "mule-skinner." His face, burned to
the colour of ripe wheat, wore a rapt and exalted look, as though the
chasing of a small animal to its death had called forth his latent
spiritual ardours. Beyond him, like a low, smouldering fire, ran the red
and gold of the abandoned field.

"Please be careful, Virginia," said Oliver again, as they left the road
and cantered in the direction of a clump of pine woods in a hollow
beyond a rotting "snake" fence.

But she had seen his eyes on Abby a minute before, and had heard his
laugh as he answered her. A wave of recklessness broke over her, and she
felt that she despised fear with all her Pendleton blood, which loved a
fight only less passionately than it loved a sermon. Whatever
happened--if she broke her neck--she resolved that she would keep up
with Abby! With the drumming of the blood in her ears, an almost savage
joy awoke in her. Deep down in her, so deep that it was buried beneath
the Virginia Pendleton whom she and her world knew, there stirred
faintly the seeds of that ancient lust of cruelty from which have sprung
the brutal pleasures of men. The part of her--that small secret
part--which was primitive answered to the impulse of jealousy as it did
to the rapturous baying of the hounds out of the red and gold distance.
A branch grazed her cheek; her hat went as she raced down the high banks
of a stream; the thicket of elder tore the ribbon from her head, and
loosened her dark flying hair from its braid. In that desolate country,
in the midst of the October meadows, with the cries of the hounds
rising, like the voice of mortal tragedy, out of the tinted mist on the
marshes, the drama of human passions--which is the only drama for the
world's stage--was played out to an ending: love, jealousy, envy,
desire, desperation, regret--

But when the hunt was over, and she rode home, with a bedraggled brush,
which had once been grey, tied to her bridle, all the gorgeous pageantry
of the autumnal landscape seemed suddenly asking her: "What is the use?"
Her mood had altered, and she felt that her victory was as worthless as
the mud-stained fox's brush that swung mockingly back and forth from her
bridle. The excitement of the chase had ebbed away, leaving only the
lifeless satisfaction of the reward. She had neglected her children, she
had risked her life--and all for the sake of wresting a bit of dead fur
out of Abby's grasp. A spirit which was not her spirit, which was so old
that she no longer recognized that it had any part in her, which was yet
so young that it burned in her heart with the unquenchable flame of
youth--this spirit, which was at the same time herself and not herself,
had driven her, as helpless as a fallen leaf, in a chase that she
despised, towards a triumph that was worthless.

"By Jove, you rode superbly, Virginia! I had no idea you could do it,"
said Oliver, as they trotted into Dinwiddie.

She smiled back at him, and her smile was tired, dust-stained,
enigmatical.

"No, you did not know that I could do it," she answered.

"You'll keep it up now, won't you?" he asked pleadingly.

For an instant, looking away from him over the radiant fields, she
pondered the question. The silence which had settled around her was
unbroken by the sound of the horses' hoofs, by the laughter of the
hunters, by the far-off soughing of the pine trees in the forest; and
into this silence, which seemed to cover an eternity, the two
Virginias--the Virginia who desired and the Virginia who had learned
from the ages to stifle her desire--wrestled for the first time
together.

"Virginia!" floated Abby's breezy tones from the street behind her, and
turning, she rode back to the Goodes' gate, where the others were
dismounting. "Virginia, aren't you going to Atlantic City with us
to-morrow?"

Again she hesitated. Almost unconsciously her gaze passed from Abby to
Oliver, and she saw his pride in her in the smile with which he watched
her.

"Yes, I'll go with you," she replied after a minute.

She had, for once in her life, done the thing she wanted to do simply
because she wanted to do it. She had won back what she was losing; she
had fought a fair fight and she had triumphed; yet as she rode down the
street to her gate, there was none of the exultation of victory, none of
the fugitive excitement of pleasure even in her heart. Like other
mortals in other triumphant instants, she was learning that the fruit of
desire may be sweet to the eyes and bitter on the lips. She had
sacrificed duty to pleasure, and suddenly she had discovered that to one
with her heritage of good and evil the two are inseparable.