THE PANG OF MOTHERHOOD


In the night Harry awoke crying. He had dreamed, he said between his
sobs, when Virginia, slipperless and in her nightdress, bent over him,
that his mother was going away from him forever.

"Only for two nights, darling. Here, lean close against mother. Don't
you know that she wouldn't stay away from her precious boy?"

"But two nights are so long. Aren't two nights almost forever?"

"Why, my lamb, it was just two nights ago that grandma came over and
told you the Bible story about Joseph and his brothers. That was only a
teeny-weeny time ago, wasn't it?"

"But you were here, then mamma. And this morning was almost forever. You
stayed out so long that Lucy said you weren't coming back any more."

"That was naughty of Lucy because she is old enough to know better. Why
do you choke that way? Does your throat hurt you?"

"It hurts because you are going away, mamma."

"But I'm going only to be with papa, precious. Don't you want poor papa
to have somebody with him?"

"He's so big he can go by himself. But suppose the black man should come
in the night while you are away, and I'd get scared and nobody would
hear me."

"Grandma would hear you, Harry, and there isn't any black man that comes
in the night. You must put that idea out of your head, dear. You're
getting too big a boy to be afraid of the dark."

"Four isn't big, is it?"

"You're nearer five than four now, honey. Let me button your nightgown,
and lie down and try to go to sleep while mamma sings to you. Does your
throat really hurt you?"

"It feels as if it had teensy-weensy marbles in it. They came there when
I woke up in the dark and thought that you were going away to-morrow."

"Well, if your throat hurts you, of course mamma won't leave you. Open
your mouth wide now so I can look at it."

She lighted a candle while Harry, kneeling in the middle of his little
bed, followed her with his blue eyes, which looked three times their
usual size because of his flushed cheeks and his mounting excitement.
His throat appeared slightly inflamed when she held the candle close to
it, and after tucking him beneath the bed-clothes, she poured a little
camphorated oil into a cup and heated it on the small alcohol lamp she
kept in the nursery.

"Mamma is going to put a nice bandage on your throat, and then she is
going to lie down beside you and sing you to sleep," she said
cheerfully, as she cut off a strip of flannel from an old petticoat and
prepared to saturate it with the heated oil.

"Will you stay here all night?"

"All night, precious, if you'll be good and go fast asleep while I am
singing."

Holding tightly to her nightdress, Harry cuddled down between the
pillows with a contented sigh. "Then I don't mind about the marbles in
my throat," he said.

"But mamma minds, and she wants to cure them before morning. Now lie
very still while she wraps this good flannel bandage over the sore
places."

"I'll lie very still if you'll hold me, mamma."

Blowing out the candle, she crept into the little bed beside him, and
lay singing softly until his hands released their desperate grasp of her
nightdress, and he slipped quietly off to sleep. Even then, remembering
her promise, she did not go back to her bedroom until daylight.

"I wonder what makes Harry so afraid of the dark?" she asked, when
Oliver awoke and turned questioningly towards her. "He worked himself
really sick last night just from pure nervousness. I had to put
camphorated oil on his throat and chest, and lie beside him until
morning. He is sleeping quietly now, but it simply frightens me to death
when one of them complains of sore throat."

"You've spoiled him, that's what's the matter," replied Oliver, yawning.
"As long as you humour him, he'll never outgrow these night terrors."

"But how can you tell whether the fright makes him sick or sickness
brings on the fright? His throat was really red, there's no doubt about
that, but I couldn't see last night that it was at all ulcerated."

"He gives you more trouble than both the other children put together."

"Well, he's a boy, and boys do give one more trouble. But, then, you
have less patience with him, Oliver."

"That's because he's a boy, and I like boys to show some pluck even when
they are babies. Lucy and Jenny never raise these midnight rows whenever
they awake in the dark."

"They are not nearly so sensitive. You don't understand Harry."

"Perhaps I don't, but I can see that you are ruining him."

"Oh, Oliver! How can you say such a cruel thing to me?"

"I didn't mean to be cruel, Jinny, and you know it, but all the same it
makes me positively sick to see you make a slave of yourself over the
children. Why, you look as if you hadn't slept for a week. You are
positively haggard."

"But I have to be up with Harry when he is ill. How in the world could I
help it?"

"You know he kicks up these rows almost every night, and you humour
every one of his whims as if it were the first one. Don't you ever get
tired?"

"Of course I do, but I can't let my child suffer even if it is only from
fear. You haven't any patience, Oliver. Don't you remember the time when
you used to be afraid of things?"

"I was never afraid of the dark in my life. No sensible child is, if he
is brought up properly."

"Do you mean I am not bringing up my children----" Her tears choked her
and she could not finish the sentence.

"I don't mean anything except that you are making an old woman of
yourself before your time. You've let yourself go until you look ten
years older than----"

He checked himself in time, but she understood without his words that he
had started to say, "ten years older than Abby." Yes, Abby did look
young--amazingly young--but, then, what else had she to think of?

She lay down, but she was trembling so violently that she sat up quickly
again in order to recover her self-possession more easily. It seemed to
her that the furious beating of her heart must make him understand how
he had wounded her. It was the first discussion approaching a quarrel
they had had since their marriage, for she, who was so pliable in all
other matters, had discovered that she could become as hard as iron
where the difference related to Harry.

"You are unjust, Oliver. I think you ought to see it," she said in a
voice which she kept by an effort from breaking.

"I'll never see it, Jinny," and some dogged impulse to hurt her more
made him add, "It's for Harry's sake as well as yours that I'm
speaking."

"For Harry's sake? Oh, you don't mean--you can't really mean that you
think I'm not doing the best for my child, Oliver?"

A year ago Oliver would have surrendered at once before the terror in
her eyes; but in those twelve long months of effort, of hope, of balked
ambition, of bitter questioning, and of tragic disillusionment, a new
quality had developed in his character, and the generous sympathy of
youth had hardened at thirty-four to the cautious cynicism of
middle-age. It is doubtful if even he himself realized how transient
such a state must be to a nature whose hidden springs were moved so
easily by the mere action of change--by the effect of any alteration in
the objects that surrounded him. Because the enthusiasm of youth was
exhausted at the minute, it seemed to him that he had lost it forever.
And to Virginia, who saw but one thing at a time and to whom that one
thing was always the present instant, it seemed that the firm ground
upon which she trod had crumbled beneath her.

"Well, if you want the truth," he said quietly (as if any mother ever
wanted the truth about such a matter), "I think you make a mistake to
spoil Harry as you do."

"But," she brought out the words with a pathetic quiver, "I treat him
just as I do the others, and you never say anything about my spoiling
them."

"Oh, the others are girls. Girls aren't so easily ruined somehow. They
don't get such hard knocks later on, so it makes less difference about
them."

As she sat there in bed, propped up on her elbow, which trembled
violently against the pillows, with her cambric nightdress, trimmed only
with a narrow band of crocheted lace, opened at her slender throat, and
her hair, which was getting thin at the temples, drawn unbecomingly back
from her forehead, she looked, indeed, as Oliver had thought, "at least
ten years older than Abby." Though she was not yet thirty, the delicate,
flower-like bloom of her beauty was already beginning to fade. The
spirit which had animated her yesterday appeared to have gone out of her
now. He thought how lovely she had been at twenty when he saw her for
the first time after his return to Dinwiddie; and a sudden anger seized
him because she was letting herself break, because she was so needlessly
sacrificing her youth and her beauty.

An hour later she got up and dressed herself, with the feeling that she
had not rested a minute during the night. Harry was listless and fretful
when he awoke, and while she put on his clothes, she debated with
herself whether or not she should summon old Doctor Fraser from around
the corner. When his lesson hour came, he climbed into her lap and went
to sleep with his hot little head on her shoulder, and though he seemed
better by evening, she was still so anxious about him that she forgot
that she had promised Abby to go with them to Atlantic City until Oliver
came in at dusk and reminded her.

"Aren't you going, Virginia?" he inquired, as he hunted in the closet
for his bag which she had not had time to pack.

"I can't, Oliver. Harry isn't well. He has been unlike himself all day,
and I am afraid to leave him."

"He looks all right," he remarked, bending over the child in Virginia's
lap. "Does anything hurt you, Harry?"

"He doesn't seem to know exactly what it is," answered Virginia, "but if
he isn't well by morning, I'll send for Doctor Fraser."

"He's got a good colour, and I believe he's as well as he ever was,"
replied Oliver, while a curious note of hostility sounded in his voice.
"There's nothing the matter with the boy," he added more positively
after a minute. "Aren't you coming, Virginia?"

She looked up at him from the big rocking-chair in which she sat with
Harry in her arms, and as she did so, both became conscious that the
issue had broadened from a question of her going to Atlantic City into a
direct conflict of wills. The only thing that could make her oppose him
had happened for the first time since her marriage. The feminine impulse
to yield was overmatched by the maternal impulse to protect. She would
have surrendered her soul to him for the asking; but she could not
surrender, even had she desired to do so, the mother love which had
passed into her from out the ages before she had been, and which would
pass through her into the ages to come after her.

"Of course, if the little chap were really suffering, I'd be as anxious
about staying as you are," said Oliver impatiently; "but there's nothing
the matter. You're all right, aren't you, Harry?"

"Yes, I'm all right," repeated Harry, yawning and snuggling closer to
Virginia, "but I'm sleepy."

"He isn't all right," insisted Virginia obstinately. "There's something
wrong with him. I don't know what it is, but he isn't in the least like
himself."

"It's just your imagination. You've got the children on the brain,
Virginia. Don't you remember the time you woke me in the night and sent
me after Doctor Fraser because Jenny had a bad attack of the hiccoughs?"

"I know," acknowledged Virginia humbly. She could be humble enough, but
what good did that do when she was, as he told himself irritably, "as
stubborn as a mule"? Her softness--she had seemed as soft as flowers
when he married her--had been her greatest charm for him after her
beauty; and now, at the end of eight years in which she had appeared as
delightfully invertebrate as he could have desired, she revealed to his
astonished eyes a backbone that was evidently made of iron. She was
immovable, he admitted, and because she was immovable he was conscious
of a sharp unreasonable impulse to reduce her to the pliant curves of
her girlhood. After eight years of an absolute supremacy, which had been
far from good for him, his will had been tripped up at last by so small
a thing as a mere whim of Virginia's.

"You told Abby you would go," he urged, exasperated rather than soothed
by her humility. "And it's too late now for her to ask any one else."

"I'm so sorry, dear, but I never once thought about it. I've been so
worried all day."

He looked at the child, lying flushed and drowsy in Virginia's arms, and
his face hardened until a latent brutality crept out around his
handsome, but loosely moulded, lips. The truth was that Harry had never
looked healthier than he did at that instant in the firelight, and the
whole affair appeared to Oliver only another instance of what he called
Virginia's "sensational motherhood."

"Can't you see for yourself that he's perfectly well?" he asked.

"I know he looks so, dear, but he isn't."

"Well, here's your mother. Leave it to her. She will agree with me."

"Why, what is it, Jinny?" asked Mrs. Pendleton, laying her bundle on the
couch (for she had come prepared to spend the night), and regarding
Oliver with the indulgent eyes of an older generation.

"Virginia says at the last minute that she won't go with us," said
Oliver, angry, yet caressing as he always was in his manner to his
mother-in-law, to whom he was sincerely devoted. "She's got into her
head that there's something wrong with Harry, but you can tell by
looking at the child that he is perfectly well."

"But I was up with him last night, mother. His throat hurts him," broke
in Virginia in a voice that was full of emotion.

"He certainly looks all right," remarked Mrs. Pendleton, "and I can take
care of him if anything should be wrong." Then she added very gravely,
"If you can't go, of course Oliver must stay at home, too, Virginia."

"I can't," said Oliver; "not just for a whim, anyway. It would break up
the party. Besides, I didn't get a holiday all summer, and I'll blow up
that confounded bank unless I take a change."

In the last quarter of an hour the trip had become of tremendous
importance to him. From a trivial incident which he might have
relinquished a week ago without regret, the excursion with Abby had
attained suddenly the dignity and the power of an event in his life.
Opposition had magnified inclination into desire.

"I don't think it will do for Oliver to go without you, Jinny," said
Mrs. Pendleton, and the gravity of her face showed how carefully she was
weighing her words.

"But I can't go, mother. You don't understand," replied Virginia, while
her lips worked convulsively. No one could understand--not even her
mother. Of the three of them, it is probable that she alone realized the
complete significance of her decision.

"Well, it's too late now, anyway," remarked Oliver shortly. "You
wouldn't have time to dress and catch the train even if you wanted to."

Taking up his bag, he kissed her carelessly, shook hands with Mrs.
Pendleton, and throwing a "Good-bye, General!" to Harry, went out of the
door.

As he vanished, Virginia started up quickly, called "Oliver!" under her
breath, and then sat down again, drawing her child closer in her arms.
Her face had grown grey and stricken like the face of an old woman.
Every atom of her quivered with the longing to run after him, to yield
to his wish, to promise anything he asked of her. Yet she knew that if
he came back, they would only pass again through the old wearing
struggle of wills. She had chosen not as she desired to, but as she
must, and already she was learning that life forces one in the end to
abide by one's choices.

"Oh, Virginia, I am afraid it was a mistake," said Mrs. Pendleton in an
agonized tone. The horror of a scandal, which was stronger in the women
of her generation than even the horror of illness, still darkened her
mind.

A shiver passed through Virginia and left her stiller and graver than
before.

"No, it was not a mistake, mother," she answered quietly. "I did what I
was obliged to do. Oliver could not understand."

As she uttered the words, she saw Oliver's face turned to Abby with the
gay and laughing expression she had seen on it when the two rode down
Old Street together, and a wave of passionate jealousy swept over her.
She had let him go alone; he was angry with her; and for three days he
would be with Abby almost every minute. And suddenly, she heard spoken
by a mocking voice at the back of her brain: "You look at least ten
years older than Abby."

"It does seem as if he might have stayed at home," remarked Mrs.
Pendleton; "but he is so used to having his own way that it is harder
for him to give it up than for the rest of us. Your father says you have
spoiled him."

She had spoiled him--this she saw clearly now, she who had never seen
anything clearly until it was too late for sentimentality to work its
harm. From the day of her marriage she had spoiled him because spoiling
him had been for her own happiness as well as for his. She had yielded
to him since her chief desire had been simply to yield and to satisfy.
Her unselfishness had been merely selfishness cloaked in the familiar
aspect of duty. Another vision of him, not as he looked when he was
riding with Abby, but as he had appeared to her in the early days of
their marriage, floated before her. He had been hers utterly then--hers
with his generous impulses, his high ideals, his undisciplined emotions.
And what had she done with him? What were her good intentions--what was
her love, even, worth--when her intentions and her love alike had been
so lacking in wisdom? It was as if she condemned herself with a judgment
which was not her own, as if her life-long habit of seeing only the
present instant had suddenly deserted her.

"He has been so nervous and unlike himself ever since the failure of his
play, mother," she said. "It's hard to understand, but it meant more to
him than a woman can realize."

"I suppose so," returned Mrs. Pendleton sympathetically. "Your father
says that he spoke to him bitterly the other day about being a failure.
Of course, he isn't one in the least, darling," she added reassuringly.

"I sometimes think that Oliver's ambition was the greatest thing in his
life," said Virginia musingly. "It meant to him, I believe, a great deal
of what the children mean to me. He felt that it was himself, and yet in
a way closer than himself. Until that dreadful time in New York I never
understood what his work may mean to a man."

"I wish you could have gone with him, Jinny."

"I couldn't," replied Virginia, as she had replied so often before. "I
know Harry doesn't look sick," she went on with that soft obstinacy
which never attacked and yet never yielded a point, "but something tells
me that he isn't well."

An hour later, when she put him to bed, he looked so gay and rosy that
she almost allowed herself the weakness of a regret. Suppose nothing was
wrong, after all? Suppose, as Oliver had said, she was merely
"sensational"? While she undressed in the dark for fear of awaking
Jenny, who was sleeping soundly in her crib on Virginia's side of the
bed, her mind went back over the two harrowing days through which she
had just lived, and she asked herself, not if she had triumphed for good
over Abby, but if she had really done what was right both for Oliver and
the children. After all, the whole of life came back simply to doing the
thing that was right. So unused was she to the kind of introspection
which weighs emotions as if they were facts, that she thought slowly,
from sheer lack of practice in the subtler processes of reasoning.
Worry, the plain, ordinary sort of worry with which she was unhappily
familiar, had not prepared her for the piercing anguish which follows
the probing of the open wounds in one's soul. To lie sleepless over
butchers' bills was different, somehow, from lying sleepless over the
possible loss of Oliver's love. It was different, and yet, just as she
had asked herself over and over again on those other nights if she had
done right to run up so large an account at Mr. Dewlap's, so she
questioned her conscience now in the hope of finding justification for
Oliver. "Ought I to have gone on the hunt yesterday?" she asked
kneeling, with sore and aching limbs, by the bedside. "Had I a right to
risk my life when the children are so young that they need me every
minute? It is true nothing happened. Providence watched over me; but,
then, something might have happened, and I could have blamed only
myself. I was jealous--for the first time in my life, I was jealous--and
because I was jealous, I did wrong and neglected my duty. Yesterday I
sacrificed the children to Oliver, and to-day I sacrificed Oliver to the
children. I love Oliver as much, but I have made the children. They came
only because I brought them into the world. I am responsible for them--I
am responsible for them," she repeated passionately; and a moment later,
she prayed softly: "O Lord, help me to want to do what is right."

Through the night, tired and sore as she was, she hardly closed her
eyes, and she was lying wide awake, with her hand on the railing of
Jenny's crib, and her gaze on the half-bared bough of the old mulberry
tree in the street, when a cry, or less than a cry, a small, choking
whimper, from the nursery, caused her to spring out of bed with a start
and slip into her wrapper which lay across the edge of the quilt.

"I'm coming, darling," she called softly, and the answer came back in
Harry's voice: "Mamma, I'm afraid!"

Without waiting to put on her slippers, for one of them had slid under
the bed, she ran across the carpet and through the doorway into the
adjoining room.

"What is it, my lamb? Does anything hurt you?" she asked anxiously.

"I'm afraid, mamma."

"What are you afraid of? Mamma is here, precious."

His little hands were hot when she clasped them, and the pathetic wonder
in his blue eyes made her heart stand still with a fear greater than
Harry's. Ever since the children had come she had lived in terror of a
serious illness attacking them.

"Where does it hurt you, darling? Can't you tell me?"

"It feels so funny when I swallow, mamma. It's all full of flannel."

"Will you open your mouth wide, then, and let mamma mop your throat with
turpentine?"

But Harry hated turpentine even more than he hated the sore throat, and
he protested with tears while she found the bottle in the bathroom and
swathed the end of the wire mop in cotton. When she brought it to his
bedside, he fought so strenuously that she was obliged at last to give
up. His fever had excited him, and he sobbed violently while she
applied the bandages to his throat and chest.

"Is it any better, dear?" she asked desperately at the end of an hour in
which he had lain, weeping and angry, in her arms.

"It feels funny. I don't like it," he sobbed, pushing her from him.

"Then I'll send for Doctor Fraser. He'll make you well."

But he didn't want Doctor Fraser, who gave the meanest medicines. He
didn't want anybody. He hated everybody. He hated Lucy. He hated Jenny.
When at last day came, and Marthy appeared to know what Virginia wanted
for breakfast, he was still vowing passionately that he hated them all.

"Marthy, run at once for Doctor Fraser. Harry is quite sick," said
Virginia, pale to the lips.

"But I won't see him, mamma, and I won't take his medicines. They are
the meanest medicines."

"Perhaps he won't give you any, precious, and if he does, mamma will
taste every single one for you."

Then Jenny began to beg to get up, and Lucy, who had been watching with
dispassionate curiosity from the edge of her little bed, was sent to
amuse her until Marthy's return.

"Suppose I had gone!" thought Virginia, while an overwhelming
thankfulness swept the anxiety out of her mind. Not until the servant
reappeared, dragging the fat old doctor after her, did Virginia remember
that she was still barefooted, and go into her bedroom to search for her
slippers.

"You don't think he is seriously sick, do you, doctor? Is there any
need to be alarmed?" she asked, and her voice entreated him to allay her
anxiety.

The doctor, a benevolent soul in a body which had run to fat from lack
of exercise, was engaged in holding Harry's tongue down with a silver
spoon, while, in spite of the child's furious protests, he leisurely
examined his throat. When the operation was over, and Harry, crying,
choking, and kicking, rolled into Virginia's arms, she put the question
again, vaguely rebelling against the gravity in the kind old face which
was turned half away from her:

"There's nothing really the matter, is there, doctor?"

He turned to her, and laid a caressing, if heavy, hand on her shoulder,
which shook suddenly under the thin folds of her dressing-gown. After
forty years in which he had watched suffering and death, he preserved
still his native repugnance to contact with any side of life that did
not have a comfortable feeling to it.

"Oh, we'll get him all right soon, with some good nursing," he said
gently, "but I think we're going to have a bit of an illness on our
hands."

"But not serious, doctor? It isn't anything serious?"

She felt suddenly so weak that she could hardly stand, and instinctively
she reached out to grasp the large, protecting arm of the physician.
Even then his bland professional smile, which had in it something of the
serene detachment of the everlasting purpose of which it was a part, did
not fade, hardly changed even, on his features.

"Well, I think we'd better get the other children away. It might be
serious if they all had it on our hands."

"Had it? Had what? Oh, doctor--not--diphtheria?"

She brought out the word with a face of such unutterable horror that he
turned his eyes away, lest the memory of her look should interfere with
his treatment of the next case he visited. There was something infernal
in the sound of the thing which always knocked over the mothers of his
generation. He had never seen one of them who could hear it without
going to pieces on his hands; and for that reason he never mentioned the
disease by name unless they drove him to it. They feared it as they
might have feared the plague--and even more! If the medical profession
would begin calling it something else, he wondered if the unmitigated
terror of it wouldn't partially subside?

"Well, it looks like that now, Jinny," he said soothingly; "but we'll
come out all right, never fear. It isn't a bad case, you know, and the
chief thing is to get the other children out of danger."

At this she went over like a log on the bed, and it was only after he
had found the bottle of camphor on the mantelpiece and held it to her
nostrils, that she revived sufficiently to sit up again. But as soon as
her strength came back, her courage surprised and rejoiced him. After
that one sign of weakness, she became suddenly strong, and he knew by
the expression of her face, for he had had great experience with
mothers, that he could count on her not to break down again while he
needed her.

"I'd like to get a tent made of some sheets and keep a kettle boiling
under it," he said, for he was an old man and belonged to the dark ages
of medicine. "But first of all I'll get the children over to your
mother's. They'd better not come in here again. I'll ask the servant to
attend to them."

"You'll find her in the dining-room," replied Virginia, while she
straightened Harry's bed and made him more comfortable. The weakness had
passed, leaving a numbed and hardened feeling as though she had turned
to wood; and when, a little later, she looked out of the door to wave
good-bye to Lucy and Jenny, she was amazed to find that she felt almost
indifferent. Every emotion, even her capacity for physical sensation,
seemed to respond to the immediate need of her, to the exhaustless
demands on her bodily strength and her courage. As long as there was
anything to be done, she was sure now that she should be able to keep up
and not lose control of herself.

"May we come back soon, mamma?" asked Lucy, standing on tiptoe to wave
at her.

"Just as soon as Harry is well, darling. Ask grandpa to pray that he
will be well soon, won't you?"

"Jenny'll pay," lisped the baby, from Doctor Fraser's arms, where, with
her cap on one side and her little feet kicking delightedly, she was
beguiled by the promise of a birthday cake over at grandma's.

"I'll look in again in an hour or two," said the doctor in his jovial
tones as he swung down the stairs. Then Lucy pattered after him, and in
a few minutes the front door closed loudly behind them, and Virginia
went back to the nursery, where Harry was coughing the strangling cough
that tore at her heart.

By nightfall he had grown very ill, and when the next dawn came, it
found her, wan, haggard, and sleepless, fighting beside the old doctor
under the improvised tent of sheets which covered the little bed. The
thought of self went from her so utterly that she only remembered she
was alive when Marthy brought food and tried to force it between her
lips.

"But you must swallow it, ma'am. You need to keep up your strength."

"How do you think he looks, Marthy? Does he feel quite so hot to you? He
seems to breathe a little better, doesn't he?"

And during the long day, while the patch of sunlight grew larger, lay
for an hour like yellow silk on the windowsill, and then slowly dwindled
into the shadow, she sat, without moving, between the bed and the table
on which stood the bottles of medicine, a glass, and a pitcher of water.
When the child slept, overcome by the stupor of fever, she watched him,
with drawn breath, lest he should fade away from her if she were to
withdraw her passionate gaze for an instant. When he awoke and lay
moaning, while his little body shook with the long stifling gasps that
struggled between his lips, she held him tightly clasped in her arms,
with a woman's pathetic faith in the power of a physical pressure to
withstand the immaterial forces of death. A hundred times during the day
he aroused himself, stirred faintly in his feverish sleep, and called
her name in the voice of terror with which he used to summon her in the
night.

"It isn't the black man now, darling, is it? Remember there is no black
man, and mamma is close here beside you."

No, it wasn't the black man; he wasn't afraid of the darkness now, but
he would like to have his ship. When she brought it, he played for a
few minutes, and dozed off still grasping the toy in his hands. At
twelve the doctor came, and again at four, when the patch of sunlight,
by which she told the hours, had begun to grow fainter on the
windowsill.

"He is better, doctor, isn't he? Don't you notice that he struggles less
when he breathes?"

He looked at her with an expression of contemplative pity in his old
watery eyes, and she gave a little cry and stretched out her hands,
blindly groping.

"Doctor, I'll do anything--anything, if you'll only save him." An
impulse to reach beyond him to some impersonal, cosmic Power greater
than he was, made her add desperately: "I'll never ask for anything else
in my life. I'll give up everything, if you'll only promise me that you
will save him."

She stood up, drawing her thin figure, as tense as a cord, to its full
height, and beneath the flowered blue dressing-gown her shoulder blades
showed sharply under their fragile covering of flesh. Her hair, which
she had not undone since the first shock of Harry's illness, hung in
straight folds on either side of her pallid and haggard face. Even the
colour of her eyes seemed to have changed, for their flower-like blue
had faded to a dull grey.

"If we can pull through the night, Jinny," he said huskily, and added
almost sternly, "you must bear up, so much depends on you. Remember, it
is your first serious illness, but it may not be your last. You've got
to take the pang of motherhood along with the pleasure, my dear----"

The pang of motherhood! Long after he had left her, and she had heard
the street gate click behind him, she sat motionless, repeating the
words, by Harry's little bed. The pang of motherhood--this was what she
was suffering--the poignant suspense, the quivering waiting, the abject
terror of loss, the unutterable anguish of the nerves, as if one's heart
were being slowly torn out of one's body. She had had the joy, and now
she was enduring the inevitable pang which is bound up, like a hidden
pulse, in every mortal delight. Never pleasure without pain, never
growth without decay, never life without death. The Law ruled even in
love, and all the pitiful little sacrifices which one offered to
Omnipotence, which one offered blindly to the Power that might separate,
with a flaming sword, the cause from the effect, the substance from the
shadow--what of them? While Harry lay there, wrapped in that burning
stupor, she prayed, not as she had been taught to pray in her childhood,
not with the humble and resigned worship of civilization, but in the
wild and threatening lament of a savage who seeks to reach the ears of
an implacable deity. In the last twenty-four hours the Unknown Power she
entreated had changed, in her imagination, to an idol who responded only
to the shedding of blood.

"Only spare my child and I will give up everything else!" she cried from
the extremity of her anguish. The sharp edge of the bed hurt her bosom
and she pressed frantically against it. Had it been possible to lacerate
her body, to cut her flesh with knives, she might have found some
pitiable comfort in the mere physical pain. Beside the agony in her
mind, a pang of the flesh would have been almost a joy.

When at last she rose from her knees, Harry lay, breathing quietly,
with his eyes closed and the toy ship on the blanket beside him. His
childish features had shrunken in a day until they appeared only half
their natural size, and a faint bluish tinge had crept over his face,
wiping out all the sweet rosy colour. But he had swallowed a few
spoonfuls of his last cup of broth, and the painful choking sound had
ceased for a minute. The change, slight as it was, had followed so
closely upon her prayers, that, while it lasted, she passed through one
of those spiritual crises which alter the whole aspect of life. An
emotion, which was a curious mixture of superstitious terror and
religious faith, swept over her, reviving and invigorating her heart.
She had abased herself in the dust before God--she had offered all her
life to Him if He would spare her child--and had He not answered? Might
not Harry's illness, indeed, have been sent to punish her for her
neglect? A shudder of abhorrence passed through her as she remembered
the fox-hunt, and her passion of jealousy. The roll of blue silk, lying
upstairs in a closet in the third storey, appeared to her now not as a
temptation to vanity, but as a reminder of the mortal sin which had
almost cost her the life of her child. And suppose God had not stopped
her in time--suppose she had gone to Atlantic City as Oliver had begged
her to do?

In the room the light faded softly, melting first like frost from the
mirror in the corner beyond the Japanese screen, creeping slowly across
the marble surface of the washstand, lingering, in little ripples, on
the green sash of the windowsill. Out of doors it was still day, and
from where she sat by Harry's bed, she could see, under the raised tent,
every detail of the street standing out distinctly in the grey
twilight. Across the way the houses were beginning to show lights at the
windows, and the old lamplighter was balancing himself unsteadily on his
ladder at the corner. On the mulberry tree near the crossing the broad
bronze leaves swung back and forth in the wind, which sighed restlessly
around the house and drove the naked tendrils of a summer vine against
the green shutters at the window. The fire had gone down, and after she
had made it up very softly, she bent over Harry again, as if she feared
that he might have slipped out of her grasp while she had crossed the
room.

"If he only lives, I will let everything else go. I will think of
nothing except my children. It will make no difference to me if I do
look ten years older than Abby does. Nothing on earth will make any
difference to me, if only God will let him get well."

And with the vow, it seemed to her that she laid her youth down on the
altar of that unseen Power whose mercy she invoked. Let her prayer only
be heard and she would demand nothing more of life--she would spend all
her future years in the willing service of love. Was it possible that
she had imagined herself unhappy thirty-six hours ago--thirty-six hours
ago when her child was not threatened? As she looked back on her past
life, it seemed to her that every minute had been crowned with
happiness. Even the loss of her newborn baby appeared such a little
thing--such a little thing beside the loss of Harry, her only son. Mere
freedom from anxiety showed to her now as a condition of positive bliss.

Six o'clock struck, and Marthy knocked at the door with a cup of milk.
"Do you think he'll be able to swallow any of it?" she asked, and there
were tears in her eyes.

"He is better, Marthy, I am sure he is better. Has mother been here this
afternoon?"

"She stopped at the door, but she didn't like to come in on account of
the children. They are both well, she says, and send you their love. Do
you want any more water in the kettle, ma'am?"

The kettle, which was simmering away beside Harry's bed, under the tent
of sheets, was passed to Marthy through the crack in the door; and when
in a few minutes the girl returned with fresh water, Virginia whispered
to her that he had taken three spoonfuls of milk.

"And he let me mop his throat with turpentine," she said in quivering
tones. "I am sure--oh, I am sure he is better."

"I am praying every minute," replied Marthy, weeping; and it seemed
suddenly to Virginia that a wave of understanding passed between her and
the ignorant mulatto girl, whom she had always regarded as of different
clay from herself. With that miraculous power of grief to level all
things, she felt that the barriers of knowledge, of race, of all the
pitiful superiorities with which human beings have obscured and
decorated the underlying spirit of life, had melted back into the
nothingness from which they had emerged in the beginning. This feeling
of oneness, which would have surprised and startled her yesterday,
appeared so natural to her now, that, after the first instant of
recognition, she hardly thought of it again.

"Thank you, Marthy," she answered gently, and closing the door, went
back to her chair under the raised corner of the sheet. When the doctor
came at nine o'clock she was sitting there, in the same position, so
still and tense that she seemed hardly to be breathing, so ashen grey
that the sheet hanging above her head showed deadly white by contrast
with her face. In those three hours she knew that the clinging tendrils
of personal desire had relaxed their hold forever on life and youth.

"If he doesn't get worse, we'll pull through," said the doctor, turning
from his examination of Harry to lay his hand, which felt as heavy as
lead, on her shoulder. "We've an even chance--if his heart doesn't go
back on us." And he added, "Most mothers are good nurses, Jinny, but I
never saw a better one than you are--unless it was your own mother. You
get it from her, I reckon. I remember when you went through diphtheria
how she sent your father to stay with one of the neighbours, and shut
herself up with old Ailsey to nurse you. I don't believe she undressed
or closed her eyes for a week."

Her own mother! So she was not the only one who had suffered this
anguish--other women, many women, had been through it before she was
born. It was a part of that immemorial pang of motherhood of which the
old doctor had spoken. "But, was I ever in danger? Was I as ill as
Harry?" she asked.

"For twenty-four hours we thought you'd slip through our fingers every
minute. 'Twas only your mother's nursing that kept you alive--I've told
her that twenty times. She never spared herself an instant, and, it may
have been my imagination, but she never seemed to me to be the same
woman afterwards. Something had gone out of her."

Now she understood, now she knew, something had gone out of her, also,
and this something was youth. No woman who had fought with death for a
child could ever be the same afterwards--could ever value again the
small personal joys, when she carried the memory of supreme joy or
supreme anguish buried within her heart. She remembered that her mother
had never seemed young to her, not even in her earliest childhood; and
she understood now why this had been so, why the deeper experiences of
life rob the smaller ones of all vividness, of all poignancy. It had
been so easy for her mother to give up little things, to deny herself,
to do without, to make no further demands on life after the great
demands had been granted her. How often had she said unthinkingly in her
girlhood, "Mother, you never want anything for yourself." Ah, she knew
now what it meant, and with the knowledge a longing seized her to throw
herself into her mother's arms, to sob out her understanding and her
sympathy, to let her feel before it was too late that she comprehended
every step of the way, every throb of the agony!

"I'd spend the night with you, Jinny, if I didn't have to be with Milly
Carrington, who has two children down with it," said the doctor; "but if
there's any change, get Marthy to come for me. If not, I'll be sure to
look in again before daybreak."

When he had gone, she moved the night lamp to the corner of the
washstand, and after swallowing hastily a cup of coffee which Marthy had
brought to her before the doctor's visit, and which had grown quite
tepid and unpalatable, she resumed her patient watch under the raised
end of the sheet. The whole of life, the whole of the universe even, had
narrowed down for her into that faint circle of light which the lamp
drew around Harry's little bed. It was as if this narrow circle beat
with a separate pulse, divided from the rest of existence by its
intense, its throbbing vitality. Here was concentrated for her all that
the world had to offer of hope, fear, rapture, or anguish. The
littleness and the terrible significance of the individual destiny were
gathered into that faintly quivering centre of space--so small a part of
the universe, and yet containing the whole universe within itself!

Outside, in the street, she could see a half-bared bough of the mulberry
tree, arching against a square of window, from which the white curtains
were drawn back; and in order to quiet her broken and disjointed
thoughts, she began to count the leaves as they fell, one by one,
turning softly at the stem, and then floating out into the darkness
beyond. "One. Two. How long that leaf takes to loosen. He is better. The
doctor certainly thought that he was better. If he only gets well. O
God, let him get well, and I will serve you all my life!
Three--four--five--For twenty-four hours we thought you would slip
through our fingers. Somebody said that--somebody--it must have been the
doctor. And he was talking of me, not of Harry. That was twenty-six
years ago, and my mother was enduring then all this agony that I am
feeling to-night. Twenty-six years ago--perhaps at this very hour, she
sat beside me alone as I am sitting now by Harry. And before that other
women went through it. All the world over, wherever there are
mothers--north, south, east, west--from the first baby that was born on
the earth--they have every one suffered what I am suffering now--for it
is the pang of motherhood! To escape it one must escape birth and escape
the love that is greater than one's self." And she understood suddenly
that suffering and love are inseparable, that when one loves another
more than one's self, one has opened the gate by which anguish will
enter. She had forgotten to count the leaves, and when she remembered
and looked again, the last one had fallen. Against the parted white
curtains, the naked bough arched black and solitary. Even the small
silent birds that had swayed dejectedly to and fro on the branches all
day had flown off into the darkness. Presently, the light in the window
went out, and as the hours wore on, a fine drizzling rain began to fall,
as soft as tears, from the starless sky over the mulberry tree. A sense
of isolation greater than any she had ever known attacked her like a
physical chill, and rising, she went over to the fire and stirred the
pile of coal into a flame. She was alone in her despair, and she
realized, with a feeling of terror, that one is always alone when one
despairs, that there is a secret chamber in every soul where neither
love nor sympathy can follow one. If Oliver were here beside her--if he
were standing close to her in that throbbing circle around the bed--she
would still be separated from him by the immensity of that inner space
which is not measured by physical distances. "No, even if he were here,
he could not reach me," she said, and an instant later, with one of
those piercing illuminations which visit even perfectly normal women in
moments of great intensity, she thought quickly, "If every woman told
the truth to herself, would she say that there is something in her which
love has never reached?" Then, reproaching herself because she had left
the bed for a minute, she went back again and bent over the unconscious
child, her whole slender body curving itself passionately into an
embrace. His face was ashen white, except where the skin around his
mouth was discoloured with a faint bluish tinge. His flesh, even his
bones, appeared to have shrunk almost away in twenty-four hours. It was
impossible to imagine that he was the rosy, laughing boy, who had
crawled into her arms only two nights ago. The disease held him like
some unseen spiritual enemy, against which all physical weapons were as
useless as the little toys of a child. How could one fight that sinister
power which had removed him to an illimitable distance while he was
still in her arms? The troubled stupor, which had in it none of the
quiet and the restfulness of sleep, terrorized her as utterly as if it
had been the personal spirit of evil. The invisible forces of Life and
Death seemed battling in the quivering air within that small circle of
light.

While she bent over him, he stirred, raised himself, and then fell back
in a paroxysm of coughing. The violence of the spasm shook his fragile
little body as a rough wind shakes a flower on a stalk. Over his face
the bluish tinge spread like a shadow, and into his eyes there came the
expression of wondering terror which she had seen before only in the
eyes of young startled animals. For an instant it seemed almost as if
the devil of disease were wrestling inside of him, as if the small
vital force she called life would be beaten out in the struggle. Then
the agony passed; the strangling sound ceased, and he grew quiet, while
she wiped the poison from his mouth and nostrils, and made him swallow a
few drops of milk out of a teaspoon.

At the moment, while she fell on her knees by his bedside, it seemed to
her that she had reached that deep place beyond which there is nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You've pulled him through. We'll have him out of bed before many days
now," said the old doctor at daybreak, and he added cheerfully, "By the
way, your husband came in the front door with me. He wanted to rush up
here at once, but I'm keeping him away because he is obliged to go back
to the bank."

"Poor Oliver," said Virginia gently. "It is terrible on him. He must be
so anxious." But even while she uttered the words, she was conscious of
a curious sensation of unreality, as though she were speaking of a
person whom she had known in another life. It was three days since she
had seen Oliver, and in those three days she had lived and died many
times.