OLIVER SURRENDERS


When Cyrus's knock came at his door, Oliver crossed the room to let in
his visitor, and then fell back, startled, at the sight of his uncle. "I
wonder what has brought him here?" he thought inhospitably. But even if
he had put the question, it is doubtful if Cyrus could have enlightened
him--for the great man was so seldom visited by an impulse that when, as
now, one actually took possession of him, he obeyed the pressure almost
unconsciously. Like most men who pride themselves upon acting solely
from reason, he was the abject slave of the few instincts which had
managed to take root and thrive in the stony ground of his nature. The
feeling for family, which was so closely entwined with his supreme
feeling for property that the two had become inseparable, moved him
to-day as it had done on the historic occasion when he had redeemed the
mortgaged roof over the heads of his spinster relations. Perhaps, too,
some of the vague softness of June had risen in him and made him gentler
in his judgments of youth.

"I didn't expect you or I'd have straightened up a bit," said Oliver,
not overgraciously, while he hastily pushed his supper of bread and tea
to one end of the table. He resented what he called in his mind "the
intrusion," and he had no particular objection to his uncle's observing
his resentment. His temper, never of the most perfect equilibrium, had
been entirely upset by the effects of a June Sunday in Dinwiddie, and
the affront of Cyrus's visit had become an indignity because of his
unfortunate selection of the supper hour. Some hidden obliquity in the
Treadwell soul, which kept it always at cross-purposes with life,
prevented any lessening of the deep antagonism between the old and the
young of the race. And so incurable was this obliquity in the soul of
Cyrus, that it forced him now to take a tone which he had resolutely set
his mind against from the moment of Mrs. Peachey's visit. He wanted to
be pleasant, but something deep down within him--some inherited tendency
to bully--was stronger than his will.

"I looked in to see if you hadn't about come to your senses," he began.

"If you mean come to your way of looking at things--then I haven't,"
replied Oliver, and added in a more courteous tone, "Won't you sit
down?"

"No, sir, I can stand long enough to say what I came to say," retorted
the other, and it seemed to him that the pleasanter he tried to make his
voice, the harsher grew the sound of it in his ears. What was it about
the rascal that rubbed him the wrong way only to look at him?

"As you please," replied Oliver quietly. "What in thunder has he got to
say to me?" he thought. "And why can't he say it and have it over?"
While Cyrus merely despised him, he detested Cyrus with all the fiery
intolerance of his age. "Standing there like an old turkey gobbler,
ugh!" he said contemptuously to himself.

"So you ain't hungry yet?" asked the old man, and felt that the words
were forced out of him by that obstinate cross-grain in his nature over
which he had no control.

"I've just had tea."

"You haven't changed your mind since you last spoke to me, eh?"

"No, I haven't changed my mind. Why should I?"

"Getting along pretty well, then?"

"As well as I expected to."

"That's good," said Cyrus mildly. "That's good. I just dropped in to
make sure that you were getting along, that's all."

"Thank you," responded Oliver, and tried from the bottom of his soul to
make the words sincere.

"If the time ever comes when you feel that you have changed your mind,
I'll find a place out at Matoaca City for you. I just wanted you to
understand that I'd do as much for Henry's son then as now. If you
weren't Henry's son, I shouldn't think twice about you."

"You mean that you'll still give me the job if I stop writing plays?"

"Oh, I won't make a point of that as long as it doesn't interfere with
your work. You may write in off hours as much as you want to. I won't
make a point of that."

"You mean to be generous, I can see--but I don't think it likely that I
shall ever make up my mind to take a regular job. I'm not built for it."

"You're not thinking about getting married, then, I reckon?"

A dark flush rose to Oliver's forehead, and turning away, he stared with
unseeing eyes out of the window.

"No. I haven't any intention of that," he responded.

A certain craftiness appeared in Cyrus's face.

"Well, well, you're young yet, and you may be in want of a wife before
you're many years older."

"I'm not the kind to marry. I'm too fond of my freedom."

"Most of us have felt like that at one time or another, but when the
thought of a woman takes you by the throat, you'll begin to see things
differently. And if you ever do, a good steady job at twelve hundred a
year will be what you'll look out for."

"I suppose a man could marry on that down here," said Oliver, half
unconscious that he was speaking aloud.

"I married on less, and I've known plenty of others that have done so. A
good saving wife puts more into a man's pocket than she takes out of
it."

As he paused, Oliver's attention, which had wandered off into a vague
mist of feeling, became suddenly riveted to the appalling spectacle of
his uncle's marriage. He saw the house in Bolingbroke Street, with the
worn drab oilcoth in the hall, and he smelt the smell of stale cooking
which floated through the green lattice door at the back. All the
sweetness of life, all the beauty, all the decency even, seemed
strangled in that smell as if in some malarial air. And in the midst of
it, the unkempt, slack figure of Belinda, with her bitter eyes and her
sagging skirt, passed perpetually under the flickering gas-jet up and
down the dimly lighted staircase. This was how one marriage had
ended--one marriage among many which had started out with passion and
courage and the belief in happiness. Knowing but little of the April
brevity of his uncle's mating impulse, he had mentally embroidered the
bare instinct with some of the idealism in which his own emotion was
clothed. His imagination pictured Cyrus and Belinda starting as
light-hearted adventurers to sail the chartless seas of romance. What
remained of their gallant ship to-day except a stark and battered hulk
wrecked on the pitiless rocks of the actuality? A month ago that
marriage had seemed merely ridiculous to him. Standing now beside the
little window, where the wan face of evening, languid and fainting
sweet, looked in from the purple twilight, he was visited by one of
those rare flashes of insight which come to men of artistic sensibility
after long periods of spiritual warfare. Pity stabbed him as sharply as
ridicule had done a moment before, and with the first sense of human
kinship he had ever felt to Cyrus, he understood suddenly the tragedy
that underlies all comic things. Could there be a deeper pathos, after
all, than simply being funny? This absurd old man, with his lean,
crooked figure, his mottled skin, and his piercing bloodshot eyes, like
the eyes of an overgorged bird of prey, appeared now as an object that
moved one to tears, not to laughter. And yet because of this very
quality which made him pitiable--this vulture-like instinct to seize and
devour the smaller--he stood to-day the most conspicuously envied figure
in Dinwiddie.

"I'm not the kind of man to marry," he repeated, but his tone had
changed.

"Well, perhaps you're wise," said Cyrus, "but if you should ever want
to----" The confidence which had gone out of Oliver had passed into him.
With his strange power of reading human nature--masculine human nature,
for the silliest woman could fool him hopelessly--he saw that his nephew
was already beginning to struggle against the temptation to yield. And
he was wise enough to know that this temptation would become stronger as
soon as Oliver felt that the outside pressure was removed. The young
man's passion was putting forward a subtler argument than Cyrus could
offer.

When his visitor had gone, Oliver turned back to the window, and resting
his arms on the sill, leaned out into the velvet softness of the
twilight. His wide vision had deserted him. It was as if his gaze had
narrowed down to a few roofs and the single street without a
turning--but beyond them the thought of Virginia lay always like an
enclosed garden of sweetness and bloom. To think of her was to pass from
the scorching heat of the day to the freshness of dew-washed flowers
under the starlight.

"It is impossible," he said aloud, and immediately, as if in answer to a
challenge, a thousand proofs came to him that other men were doing the
impossible every day. How many writers--great writers, too--would have
jumped at a job on a railroad to insure them against starvation? How
many had married young and faced the future on less than twelve hundred
dollars a year? How many had let love lead them where it would without
butting their brains forever against the damned wall of expediency?

"It's impossible," he said again, and turning from the window, made
himself ready to go out. While he brushed his hair and pulled the end of
his necktie through the loop, his gaze wandered back over the roofs to
where a solitary mimosa tree drooped against the lemon-coloured
afterglow. The dust lay like gauze over the distance. Not a breath
stirred. Not a leaf fell. Not a figure moved in the town--except the
crouching figure of a stray cat that crawled, in search of food, along
the brick wall under the dead tree.

"God! What a life!" he cried suddenly. And beyond this parching desert
of the present he saw again that enclosed garden of sweetness and bloom,
which was Virginia. His resolution, weakened by the long hot afternoon,
seemed to faint under the pressure of his longing. All the burden of the
day--the heat, the languor, the scorching thirst of the fields, the
brazen blue of the sky, the stillness as of a suspended breath which
wrapt the town--all these things had passed into the intolerableness of
his desire. He felt it like a hot wind blowing over him, and it seemed
to him that he was as helpless as a leaf in the current of this wind
which was sweeping him onward. Something older than his will was driving
him; and this something had come to him from out the twilight, where the
mimosa trees drooped like a veil against the afterglow.

Taking up his hat, he left the room and descended the stairs to the wide
hall where Tom Peachey sat, gasping for breath, midway of two open
doors.

"I'll be darned if I can make a draught," muttered the old soldier
irascibly, while he picked up his alpaca coat from the balustrade, and
slipped into it before going out upon the front porch into the possible
presence of ladies. His usually cheerful face was clouded, for his
habitual apathy had deserted him, and he had reached the painful
decision that when you looked things squarely in the face there was
precious little that was worth living for--a conclusion to which he had
been brought by the simple accident of an overdose of Kentucky rye in
his mint julep after church. The overdose had sent him to sleep too soon
after his Sunday dinner, and when he had awakened from his heavy and by
no means quiet slumber, he had found himself confronting a world of
gloom.

"I'm damned tired making the best of things, if you want to know what is
the matter with me," he had remarked crossly to his wife.

"The idea, Mr. Peachey! You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" that
sprightly lady had responded while she prepared herself for her victory
over Cyrus.

"Well, I ain't," honest Tom had retorted. "I've gone on pretending for
fifty years and I'm going to stop it. What good has it done, anyway? It
hasn't put a roof on, has it?"

"I told you you oughtn't to go to sleep right on top of your dinner,"
she had replied soothingly. "I declare you're perfectly purple. I never
saw you so upset. Here, take this palm-leaf fan and go and see if you
can't find a draught. You know it's downright sinful to talk that way
after the Lord has been so good to you."

But Philosophy, though she is unassailable when she clings to her
safeguard of the universal, meets her match whenever she descends to an
open engagement with the particular.

"W-what's He done for me?" demanded not Tom, but the whiskey inside of
him.

Driven against that bleak rock of fact upon which so many shining
generalizations have come to wreck, Mrs. Peachey had cast about
helplessly for some floating spar of logic which might bear her to the
firm ground of established optimism. "I declare, Tom, I believe you are
out of your head!" she exclaimed, adding immediately, "You ought to be
ashamed of yourself to be so ungrateful when the good Lord has kept you
out of the poorhouse. If you weren't tipsy, I'd give you a hard shaking.
Now, you take that palm-leaf fan and go right straight downstairs."

So Tom had gone, for his wife, who lacked the gift of argument,
possessed the energy of character which renders such minor attributes
unnecessary; and Oliver, passing through the hall a couple of hours
later, found him still helplessly seeking the draught towards which she
had directed him.

"Any chance of a breeze springing up?" inquired the young man as they
moved together to the porch.

The force which was driving him out of the house into the suffocating
streets was in his voice when he spoke, but honest Tom did not hear it.
After the four war years in which he had been almost sublime, the old
soldier had gradually ceased even to be human, and that vegetable calm
which envelops persons who have fallen into the habit of sitting still,
had endowed him at last with the perfect serenity of a cabbage. The only
active principle which ever moved in him was the borrowed principle of
alcohol--for when that artificial energy subsided, he sank back, as he
was beginning to do now, into the spiritual inertia which sustains those
who have outlived their capacity for the heroic.

"I ain't felt a breath," he replied, peering southward where the stars
were coming out in a cloudless sky. "I don't reckon we'll get it till on
about eleven."

"Looks as if we were in for a scorching summer, doesn't it?"

"You never can tell. There's always a spell in June." And he who had
been a hero, sat down in his cane-bottomed chair and waved the palm-leaf
fan feebly in front of him. He had had his day; he had fought his fight;
he had helped to make the history of battles--and now what remained to
him? The stainless memory of the four years when he was a hero; a
smoldering ember still left from that flaming glory which was his soul!

In the street the dust lay thick and still, and the wilted foliage of
the mulberry trees hung motionless from the great arching boughs. Only
an aspen at the corner seemed alive and tremulous, while sensitive
little shivers ran through the silvery leaves, which looked as if they
were cut out of velvet. As Oliver left the house, the town awoke slowly
from its lethargy, and the sound of laughter floated to him from the
porches behind their screens of honeysuckle or roses. But even this
laughter seemed to him to contain the burden of weariness which
oppressed and disenchanted his spirit. The pall of melancholy spread
from the winding yellow river at the foot of the hill to the procession
of cedars which stood pitch-black against the few dim stars on the
eastern horizon.

"What is the use?" he asked himself suddenly, uttering aloud that grim
question which lies always beneath the vivid, richly clustering
impressions in the imaginative mind. Of his struggle, his sacrifice--of
his art even--what was the use? A bitter despondency--the crushing
despondency of youth which age does not feel and has forgotten--weighed
upon him like a physical burden. And because he was young and not
without a certain pride in the intensity of his suffering, he increased
his misery by doggedly refusing to trace it back to its natural origin
in an empty stomach.

But the laws that govern the variable mind of man are as inscrutable as
the secret of light. Turning into a cross street, he came upon the tower
of Saint James' Church, and he grew suddenly cheerful. The quickening of
his pulses changed the aspect of the town as completely as if an
invigorating shower had fallen upon it. The supreme, haunting interest
of life revived.

He had meant merely to pass the rectory without stopping; but as he
turned into the slanting street at the foot of the twelve stone steps,
he saw a glimmer of white on the terrace, and the face of Virginia
looked down at him over the palings of the gate. Immediately it seemed
to him that he had known from the beginning that he should meet her. A
sense of recognition so piercingly sweet that it stirred his pulses like
wine was in his heart as he moved towards her. The whole universe
appeared to him to have been planned and perfected for this instant. The
languorous June evening, the fainting sweetness of flowers, the strange
lemon-coloured afterglow, and her face, shining there like a star in the
twilight--these had waited for him, he felt, since the beginning of
earth. That fatalistic reliance upon an outside Power, which assumed for
him the radiant guise of first love, and for Susan the stark certainties
of Presbyterianism, dominated him as completely as if he were the
predestined vehicle of its expression. Ardent, yet passive, Virginia
leaned above him on the dim terrace. So still she seemed that her breath
left her parted lips as softly as the perfume detached itself from the
opening rose-leaves. She made no gesture, she said no word--but suddenly
he became aware that her stillness was stronger to draw him than any
speech. All her woman's mystery was brooding there about her in the June
twilight; and in this strange strength of quietness Nature had placed,
for once, an invincible weapon in the weaker hands. Her appeal had
become a part of the terrible and beneficent powers of Life.

Crossing the street, he went up the steps to where she leaned on the
gate.

"It has been so long," he said, and the words seemed to him hideously
empty. "I have not seen you but three times since the party."

She did not answer, and as he looked at her closer, he saw that her eyes
were full of tears.

"Virginia!" he cried out sharply, and the next instant, at her first
movement away from him, his arms were around her and his lips seeking
hers.

The world stopped suddenly while a starry eternity enveloped them. All
youth was packed into that minute, all the troubled sweetness of desire,
all the fugitive ecstasy of fulfilment.

"I--I thought you did not care," she murmured beneath his kisses.

He could not speak--for it was a part of his ironic destiny that he, who
was prodigal of light words, should find himself stricken dumb in any
crucial instant.

"You know--you know----" he stammered, holding her closer.

"Then it--it is not all a dream?" she asked.

"I adored you from the first minute--you saw that--you knew it. I've
wanted you day and night since I first looked at you."

"But you kept away. You avoided me. I couldn't understand."

"It was because I knew I couldn't be with you five minutes without
kissing you. And I oughtn't to--it's madness in me--for I'm desperately
poor, darling; I've no right to marry you."

A little smile shone on her lips. "As if I cared about that, Oliver."

"Then you'll marry me? You'll marry me, my beautiful?"

She lifted her face from his breast, and her look was like the enkindled
glory of the sunrise. "Don't you see? Haven't you seen from the
beginning?" she asked.

"I was afraid to see, darling--but, Virginia--oh, Virginia, let it be
soon!"

When he went from her a little later, it seemed to him that all of life
had been pressed down into the minute when he had held her against his
breast; and as he walked through the dimly lighted streets, among the
shadows of men who, like himself, were pursuing some shadowy joy, he
carried with him that strange vision of a heaven on earth which has
haunted mortal eyes since the beginning of love. Happiness appeared to
him as a condition which he had achieved by a few words, by a kiss, in a
minute of time, but which belonged to him so entirely now that he could
never be defrauded of it again in the future. Whatever happened to him,
he could never be separated from the bliss of that instant when he had
held her.

He was going to Cyrus while his ecstasy ennobled even the prosaic fact
of the railroad. And just as on that other evening, when he had rushed
in anger away from the house of his uncle, so now he was exalted by the
consciousness that he was following the lead of the more spiritual part
of his nature--for the line of least resistance was so overgrown with
exquisite impressions that he no longer recognized it. The sacrifice of
art for love appeared to him to-day as splendidly romantic as the
sacrifice of comfort for art had seemed to him a few months ago. His
desire controlled him so absolutely that he obeyed its different
promptings under the belief that he was obeying the principles whose
names he borrowed. The thing he wanted was transmuted by the fire of his
temperament into some artificial likeness to the thing that was good for
him.

On the front steps, between the two pink oleanders, Cyrus was standing
with his gaze fixed on a small grocery store across the street, and at
the sight of his nephew a look of curiosity, which was as personal an
emotion as he was in the habit of feeling, appeared on his lean yellow
face. Behind him, the door into the hall stood open, and his stooping
figure was outlined against the light of the gas-jet by the staircase.

"You see I've come," said Oliver; for Cyrus, who never spoke first
unless he was sure of dominating the situation, had waited for him to
begin.

"Yes, I see," replied the old man, not unkindly. "I expected you, but
hardly so soon--hardly so soon."

"It's about the place on the railroad. If you are still of the same
mind, I'd like you to give me a trial."

"When would you want to start?"

"The sooner the better. I'd rather get settled there before the autumn.
I'm going to be married sometime in the autumn--October, perhaps."

"Ah!" said Cyrus softly, and Oliver was grateful to him because he
didn't attempt to crow.

"We haven't told any one yet--but I wanted to make sure of the job. It's
all right, then, isn't it?"

"Oh, yes, it's all right, if you do your part. She's Gabriel Pendleton's
girl, isn't she?"

"She's Virginia Pendleton. You know her, of course." He tried honestly
to be natural, but in spite of himself he could not keep a note of
constraint out of his voice. Merely to discuss Virginia with Cyrus
seemed, in some subtle way, an affront to her. Yet he knew that the old
man wanted to be kind, and the knowledge touched him.

"Oh, yes, I know her. She's a good girl, and there doesn't live a better
man than Gabriel."

"I don't deserve her, of course. But, then, there never lived a man who
deserved an angel."

"Ain't you coming in?" asked Cyrus.

"Not this evening. I only wanted to speak to you. I suppose I'd better
go down to the office to-morrow and talk to Mr. Burden, hadn't I?"

"Come about noon, and I'll tell him to expect you. Well, if you ain't
coming in, I reckon I'll close this door."

Looking up a minute later from the pavement Oliver saw his aunt rocking
slowly back and forth at the window of her room, and the remembrance of
her fell like a blight over his happiness.

By the time he reached High Street a wind had risen beyond the hill near
the river, and the scattered papers on the pavement fled like grey wings
before him into the darkness. As the air freshened, faces appeared in
the doors along the way, and the whole town seemed drinking in the
cooling breeze as if it were water. On the wind sped, blowing over the
slack figure of Mrs. Treadwell; blowing over the conquering smile of
Susan, who was unbinding her long hair; blowing over the joy-brightened
eyes of Virginia, who dreamed in the starlight of the life that would
come to her; blowing over the ghost-haunted face of her mother, who
dreamed of the life that had gone by her; blowing at last, beyond the
river, over the tired hands of the little seamstress, who dreamed of
nothing except of how she might keep her living body out of the
poorhouse and her dead body out of the potter's field. And over the
town, with its twenty-one thousand souls, each of whom contained within
itself a separate universe of tragedy and of joy, of hope and of
disappointment, the wind passed as lightly it passed over the unquiet
dust in the streets below.