VIRGINIA'S LETTERS


    MATOACA CITY, West Virginia, October 16, 1884.
    DEAREST, DEAREST MOTHER:

We got here this morning after a dreadful trip--nine or ten hours
late--and this is the first minute I've had when I could sit down and
write to you. All the way on the train I was thinking of you and dear
father, and longing for you so that I could hardly keep back the tears.
I don't see how I can possibly stay away from you for a whole year.
Oliver says he wants to take me home for Christmas if everything goes
all right with us here and his work proves satisfactory to the manager.
Oh, mother, he is the loveliest thing to me! I don't believe he has
thought of himself a single minute since I married him. He says the only
wish he has on earth is to make me happy--and he is so careful about me
that I'm afraid I'll be spoiled to death before you see me again. He
says he loves the little grey dress of shot silk, with the bonnet that
makes me look like a Quaker. I wish now I'd got my other hat the bonnet
shape as you wanted me to do--but perhaps, after all, it will be more
useful and keep in fashion longer as it is. When I took out my clothes
this morning, while Oliver was downstairs, and remembered how you had
folded and packed everything, I just sat down on the floor in the midst
of them and had a good cry. I never realized how much I loved you until
I got into the carriage to come away. Then I wanted to jump out and put
my arms around you and tell you that you are the best and dearest mother
a girl ever had. My things were so beautifully packed that there wasn't
a single crease anywhere--not even in the black silk polonaise that we
were so afraid would get rumpled. I don't see how on earth you folded
them so smoothly. By the way, I hardly think I shall have any need of my
wedding dress while I am here, so you may as well put it away at home
until I come back. This place seems to be just a mining town, with very
few people of our class, and those all connected with the railroad. Of
course, I may be mistaken, but from my first impressions I doubt if I'll
ever want to have much to do with anybody that I've seen. It doesn't
make a bit of difference, of course, because I shan't be lonesome a
minute with the house to look after and Oliver's clothes to attend to;
and, besides, I don't think a married woman ought to make many new
friends. Her husband ought to be enough for her. Mrs. Payson, the
manager's wife, was here to welcome me, but I hope I shan't see very
much of her, because she isn't just exactly what I should call ladylike.
Of course I wouldn't breathe this to any other living soul, but I
thought her entirely too free and easy in her manner, and she dresses in
such very bright colours. Why, she had a red feather in her hat, and she
must have been married at least fifteen years. Oliver says he doesn't
believe she's a day under forty-five. He says he likes her well enough
and thinks she's a good sort, but he is awfully glad that I'm not that
kind of woman. I feel sorry for her husband, for I'm sure no man wants
his wife to make herself conspicuous, and they say she even makes
speeches when she is in the North. Maybe she isn't to blame, because she
was brought up that way, but I am going to see just as little of her as
I can.

And now I must tell you about our house, for I know you are dying to
hear how we are fixed. It's the tiniest one you ever imagined, with a
front yard the size of a pocket handkerchief, and it is painted the most
perfectly hideous shade of yellow--the shade father always calls
bilious. I can't understand why they made it so ugly, but, then, the
whole town is just as ugly as our house is. The people here don't seem
to have the least bit of taste. All the porches have dreadful brown
ornaments along the top of them, and they look exactly as if they were
made out of gingerbread. There are very few gardens, and nobody takes
any care of these. I suppose one reason is that it is almost impossible
to get servants for love or money. There are hardly any darkies here,
they say, and the few they have are perfectly worthless. Mrs.
Midden--the woman who opened my house for me--hasn't been able to get me
a cook, and we'll either have to take our meals at a boarding-house
across the street, or I shall have to put to practise the lessons you
gave me. I am so glad you made me learn how to housekeep and to cook,
because I am certain that I shall have greater need of both of these
accomplishments than of either drawing or music. Oliver was simply
horrified when I told him so. He said he'd rather starve than see me in
the kitchen, and he urged me to get you to send us a servant from
Dinwiddie--but things are so terribly costly here--you never dreamed of
such prices--that I really don't believe we can afford to have one come.
Then, Mrs. Midden says that they get ruined just as soon as they are
brought here. Everybody tries it at first, she told me, and it has
always proved a disappointment in the end. I am perfectly sure that I
shan't mind cooking at all--and as for cleaning up this little
house--why, it won't take me an hour--but Oliver almost weeps every time
I mention it. He is afraid every instant he is away from me that I am
lonesome or something has happened to me, and whenever he has ten
minutes free he runs up here to see what I am doing. Do you know he has
made me promise not to go out by myself until I am used to the place.
Isn't that too absurd?

Dearest mother, I must stop now, and write some notes of thanks for my
presents. The barrels of china haven't come yet, but the silver box got
here almost as soon as we did. Freight takes a long time, Oliver says.
It will be such fun unpacking all my presents and putting them away on
the shelves. I was so excited those last few days that I hardly paid any
attention to the things that came. Now I shall have time really to enjoy
them, and to realize how sweet and lovely everybody has been to me.
Wasn't it too dear of Miss Priscilla to give me that beautiful tea-set?
And I was so touched by poor little Miss Willy spending her hard-earned
money on that vase. I wish she hadn't. It makes me feel badly to think
of it--but I don't see what I could do about it, do you? I think I'll
try to send her a cloak or something at Christmas.

I haven't said half that I want to--but I shall keep the rest for
to-morrow.

    With a dozen kisses and my dearest love to father,
    Your ever, ever loving and grateful daughter,
    VIRGINIA

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. December 25, 1884.
    DEAREST MOTHER:

It almost broke my heart not to be able to go home for Christmas. It
doesn't seem like Christmas at all away from you--though, of course, I
try not to let Oliver see how I mind it. He has so much to bother him,
poor dear, that I keep all of my worries, big and little, in the
background. When anything goes wrong in the house I never tell him,
because he has so many important things on his mind that I don't think I
ought to trouble him about small ones. We have given up going to the
boarding-house for our meals, because neither of us could eat a morsel
of the food they had there--did you ever hear of such a thing as having
pie and preserves for breakfast?--and Oliver says it used to make him
sick to see me in the midst of all of those people. They came from all
over the country, and hardly anybody could speak a grammatical sentence.
The man who sat next to me always said "he don't" and "I ain't feeling
good to-day" and once even "I done it"--can you imagine such a thing?
Every other word was "guess," and yet they had the impertinence to laugh
at me when I said "reckon," which, I am sure father told me was
Shakespearian English. Well, we stood it as long as we could, and then
we started having our meals here, and it is so much nicer. Oliver says
the change from the boarding-house has given him a splendid appetite,
and he enjoys everything that I make so much--particularly the waffles
by Aunt Ailsey's recipe. Be sure to tell her. At first I had a servant,
but she was so dreadful that I let her go at the end of the month, and I
really get on ever so much better without her. She hadn't the faintest
idea how to cook, and had never made a piece of light bread in her life.
Besides, she was too untidy for anything, and actually swept the trash
under the bed except once a week when she pretended to give a thorough
cleaning. The first time she changed the sheets, I found that she had
simply put on one fresh one, and was going to use the bottom one on top.
She said she'd never heard of doing it any other way, and I had to laugh
when I thought of how your face would have looked if you could have
heard her. It really is the greatest relief to get rid of her, and I'd a
hundred times rather do the work myself than have another of that kind.
At first Oliver hated dreadfully to have me do everything about the
house, but he is beginning to get used to it now, because, of course, I
never let him see if anything happens to worry me or if I am tired when
he comes home. It takes every minute of my time, but, then, there is
nothing else here that I care to do, and I never leave the house except
to take a little walk with Oliver on Sunday afternoon. Mrs. Midden says
that I make a mistake to give a spring cleaning every day, but I love to
keep the house looking perfectly spick and span, and I make hot bread
twice a day, because Oliver is so fond of it. He is just as sweet and
dear as he can be and wants to help about everything, but I hate to see
him doing housework. Somehow it doesn't seem to me to look manly. We
have had our first quarrel about who is to get up and make the fires in
the morning. Oliver insisted that he was to do it, but I wake so much
earlier than he does, because I've got the bread on my mind, that I
almost always have the wood burning before he gets up. The first few
times he was really angry about it, and he didn't seem to understand why
I hated so to wake him. He says he hates still worse to see my hands get
rough--but I am so thankful that I am not one of those girls (like Abby
Goode) who are forever thinking of how they look. But Oliver made such a
fuss about the fires that I didn't tell him that I went down to the
cellar one morning and brought up a basket of coal. The boy didn't come
the day before, so there wasn't any to start the kitchen fire with, and
I knew that by the time Oliver got up and dressed it would be too late
to have hot rolls for breakfast. By the way, could you have a bushel of
cornmeal sent to me from Dinwiddie? The kind they have here isn't the
least bit like the water-ground sort we have at home, and most of it is
yellow. Nobody ever has batterbread here. All the food is different from
ours. I suppose that is because most of the people are from the North
and West.

I have the table all set for our Christmas dinner, and in a few minutes
I must put the turkey into the oven. I was so glad to get the plum
pudding in the Christmas box, because I could never have made one half
so good as yours, and the fruit cake will last me forever--it is so big.
I wrote you about the box yesterday just as soon as it came, but after I
had sent my letter, I went back to it and found that rose point scarf of
grandmother's wrapped in tissue paper in the bottom. Darling mother, it
made me cry. You oughtn't to have given it to me. It always looked so
lovely on your black silk, and it was almost the last thing you had
left. I don't believe I shall ever make up my mind to wear it. I have on
my little grey silk to-day, and it looks so nice. You must tell Miss
Willy that it has been very much admired. Mrs. Payson asked me if it was
made in Dinwiddie, and, you know, she gets all of her clothes from New
York. That must have been why I thought her over-dressed when I first
saw her. By the way, I've almost changed my mind about her since I wrote
you what I thought of her. I believe now that the whole trouble with her
is simply that she isn't a Southern lady. She means well, I am sure, but
she isn't what I should call exactly refined. There's something "horsey"
about her--I can't think of any other way to express it--something that
reminds me just a little bit of Abby--and, you remember, we always said
Abby got that from being educated in the North. Tell dearest Susan I
really think it is fortunate that she did not go to one of their
colleges. Mrs. Payson is a college woman and it seems to me that she is
always trying to appear as clever as a man. She talks in a way sometimes
that sounds as if she believed in woman's rights and all that sort of
thing. I told Oliver about it, and he laughed and said that men hated
talk like that. He says all a man admires in a woman is her power of
loving, and that when she begins to ape a man she loses her charm for
him. I can't understand why Mr. Payson married his wife. He said such
nice things to me the other day about my being so domestic and such a
home lover, that I really felt sorry for him. When I told him that I
was so fond of staying indoors that I would never cross my threshold if
Oliver didn't make me, he laughed and said that he wished I'd convert
his wife to my way of thinking. Yet he seems to have the greatest
admiration for her, and, do you know, I believe he even admires that red
feather, though he doesn't approve of it. He never turns his eyes away
from her when they are together, which isn't very much, as she goes
about just as she pleases without him. Can you understand how a person
can both admire and disapprove of a thing? Oliver says he knows how it
is, but I must say that I don't. I hope and pray that our marriage will
always be different from theirs. Oliver and I are never apart for a
single minute except when he is at work in the office. He hasn't written
a line since we came here, but he is going to begin as soon as we get
settled, and then he says that I may sit in the room and sew if I want
to. I can't believe that people really love each other unless they want
to be together every instant, no matter what they are doing. Why, if
Oliver went out to men's dinners without me as Mr. Payson does (though
she doesn't seem to mind it) I should just sit at home by myself and cry
my eyes out. I think love, if it is love, ought to be all in all. I am
perfectly sure that if I live to be a hundred I shall never want any
society but Oliver's. He is the whole world to me, and when he is not
here I spend my time, unless I am at work, just sitting and thinking
about him. My one idea is to make him as happy as I can, and when a
woman does this for a man I don't think she has time to run around by
herself as Mrs. Payson does. Tell dearest father that I so often think
of his sermons and the beautiful things he said about women. The rector
here doesn't compare with him as a preacher.

This is such a long letter it will take two stamps. I've just let myself
run on without thinking what I was writing, so if I have made any
mistakes in grammar or in spelling, please don't let father see them but
read my letter aloud to him. I can shut my eyes and see you sitting at
dinner, with Docia bringing in the plum pudding, and I know you will
talk of me while you help to it. Write me who comes to dinner with you.
I wonder if Miss Priscilla and John Henry are there as usual. Do you
know whether John Henry ever goes to the Treadwell's or not? I wish you
would ask him to take Susan to see his old mammy in Pink Alley. Now that
I am not there to go to see her occasionally, I am afraid she will get
lonesome.

Good-bye, dearest mother. I will write to you before New Year. I am so
busy that I don't have time to write every day, but you will understand
and so will father.

    With my heart's fondest love to you both,
    Your
    VIRGINIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. June 6, 1885.
    DARLING MOTHER:

The little patterns were exactly what I wanted--thank you a thousand
times. I knew you would be overjoyed at the news, and you are the only
person I've breathed it to--except, of course, dear Oliver, who is
frightened to death already. He has made me stop everything at once, and
whenever he sees me lift my hand, he begins to get nervous and begs me
not to do it. Oh, mother, he loves me so that it is really pathetic to
see his anxiety. And--can you believe it--he doesn't appear to be the
least bit glad about it. When I told him, he looked amazed--as if he had
never thought of its happening--and said, "Oh, Virginia, not so soon!"
He told me afterwards that, of course, he'd always thought we'd have
children after a while, before we were middle-aged, but that he had
wanted to stay like this for at least five or ten years. When the baby
comes, he says he supposes he'll like it, but that he can't honestly say
he is glad. It's funny how frightened he is, because I am not the least
bit so. All women must expect to have children when they marry, and if
God makes them suffer for it, it must be because it is best that they
should. Perhaps they wouldn't love their babies so much if they got them
easily. I never think of the pain a minute. It all seems so beautiful
and sacred to me that I can't understand why Oliver isn't enraptured
just as I am. To think of a new life starting into the world from me--a
life that is half mine and half Oliver's, and one that would never be at
all except for our love. The baby will seem from the very first minute
to be our love made into flesh. I don't see how a woman who feels this
could waste a thought on what she has to suffer.

I am so glad you are going to send me a nurse from Dinwiddie, because
I'm afraid I could never get one here that I could trust. The servant
Oliver got me is no earthly account, and I still do as much of the
cooking as I can. The house doesn't look nearly so nice as it used to,
but the doctor tells me that I mustn't sweep, so I only do the light
dusting. I sew almost all the time, and I've already finished the little
slips. To-day I'm going to cut out the petticoats. I couldn't tell from
the pattern you sent whether they fasten in front or in the back. There
are no places for buttonholes. Do you use safety pins to fasten them
with? The embroidery is perfectly lovely, and will make the sweetest
trimming. I am using pink for the basket because Oliver and I both hope
the baby will be a girl. If it is, I shall name her after you, of
course, and I want her to be just exactly like you. Oliver says he can't
understand why anybody ever wants a boy--girls are so much nicer. But
then he insists that if she isn't born with blue eyes, he will send her
to the orphanage.

I am trying to do just as you tell me to, and to be as careful as I
possibly can. The doctor thinks I've stayed indoors too much since I
came here, so I go out for a little walk with Oliver every night. I am
so afraid that somebody will see me that I really hate to go out at all,
and always choose the darkest streets I can find. Last night I had a bad
stumble, and Oliver says he doesn't care if the whole town discovers us,
he's not going to take me down any more unlighted alleys.

It has been terribly hot all day--not a breath of air stirring--and I
never felt the heat so much in my life. The doctor says it's because of
my condition--and last night, after Oliver went to sleep, I got up and
sat by the window until daybreak. At first I was dreadfully frightened,
and thought I was going to stifle--but poor Oliver had come home so
tired that I made up my mind I wasn't going to wake him if I could
possibly help it. This morning I didn't tell him a word about it, and he
hasn't the least idea that I didn't sleep soundly all night. I suppose
that's why I feel so dragged and worn out to-day, just as if somebody
had given me a good beating. I was obliged to lie down most of the
afternoon, but I am going to take a bath in a few minutes and try to
make myself look nice and fresh before Oliver comes home. I have let out
that flowered organdie--the one you liked so much--and I wear it almost
every evening. I know I look dreadfully, but Oliver says I am more
beautiful than ever. It seems to me sometimes that men are born blind
where women are concerned, but perhaps God made it that way on purpose.
Do you know Oliver really admires Mrs. Payson, and he thinks that red
feather very becoming to her. He says she's much too good for her
husband, but I have been obliged to disagree with him about that. Even
if Mr. Payson does drink a little, I am sure it is only because he gets
lonesome when he is left by himself, and that she could prevent it if
she tried. Oliver and I never talk about these things because he sees
that I feel so strongly about them.

Oh, darling mother, I shall be so glad to see you! I hope and pray that
father will be well enough for you to come a whole month ahead. In that
case you will be here in less than two months, won't you? If the baby
comes on the twelfth of August, she (I am perfectly sure it will be a
girl) and father will have the same birthday. I am so anxious that she
shall be born on that day.

Well, I must stop now, though I could run on forever. I never see a
living soul from one day to another--Mrs. Payson is out of town--so when
Oliver stays late at the office, and I am too tired to work, I get a
little--just a little bit lonesome. Mr. Payson sent me a pile of novels
by Oliver the other night--but I haven't looked into them. I always feel
that it is a waste of time to read when there are things about the house
that ought to be done. I wish everything didn't cost so much here. Money
doesn't go half as far as it does in Dinwiddie. The price of meat is
almost three times as much as it is at home, and chickens are so
expensive that we have them only twice a week. It is hard to housekeep
on a small allowance, and now that we have to save for the baby's
coming, I have to count every penny. I have bought a little book like
yours, and I put down all that I spend during the day, and then add it
up at night before going to bed. Oliver says I'm dreadfully frugal, but
I am always so terribly afraid of running over my allowance (which is
every cent that we can afford) and not having the money to pay the
doctor's bills when they are due. Nobody could be more generous with
money than Oliver is--I couldn't endure being married to a stingy man
like Mr. Treadwell--and the other day when one of the men in the office
died, he sent the most beautiful wreath that cost ten dollars. I am
trying to save enough out of the housekeeping balance to pay for it, for
Oliver always runs out of his pocket money before the middle of the
month. I haven't bought anything for the baby because you sent me all
the materials I needed, and I have been sewing on those ever since they
came. Of course my own clothes are still as good as new, so the only
expense will be the doctor and the nurse and the extra things I shall be
obliged to have to eat when I am sick.

Give dear father a dozen kisses from me, and tell him to hurry and get
well so he can christen his granddaughter.

    Your devoted and ever grateful
    VIRGINIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. August 11, 1885.
    DARLING MOTHER:

Just a line to say that I am so, so sorry you can't come, but that you
mustn't worry a minute, because everything is going beautifully, and I
am not the least bit afraid. The doctor says he never saw any one in a
better frame of mind or so little nervous. Give my dear love to father.
I am so distressed that he should suffer as he does. Rheumatism must be
such terrible pain, and I don't wonder that you are frightened lest it
should go to his heart. I shall send you a telegram as soon as the baby
comes.

    Your devoted daughter,
    VIRGINIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. August 29, 1885.
    MY PRECIOUS MOTHER:

This is the first time I have sat up in bed, and I am trying to write a
little note to you on a pillow instead of a desk. My hand shakes so that
I'm afraid you won't be able to read it, but I felt that I wanted to
send you a few words of my very own, not dictated to the nurse or to
Mrs. Payson. I can't tell you how perfectly lovely Mrs. Payson has been
to me. She was here all that dreadful night, and I believe I should have
died without her. The doctor said I had such a hard time because I'd let
myself get run down and stayed indoors too much. But I'm getting all
right now--and the rest is over and doesn't matter. As soon as I am
strong again I shall be perfectly happy.

Oh, mother, aren't you delighted that the baby is a girl, after all? It
was the first question I asked when I came back to consciousness the
next morning, and when they told me it was, I said, "Her name is Lucy
Pendleton," and that was all. I was so weak they wouldn't let me open my
lips again, and Oliver was kept out of the room for almost ten days
because I would talk to him. Poor fellow, it almost killed him. He is as
white as a sheet still, and looks as if he had been through tortures. It
must have been terrible for him, because I was really very, very ill at
one time.

But it is all over now, and the baby is the sweetest thing you ever
imagined. I believe she knows me already, and Mrs. Payson says she is
exactly like me, though I can see the strongest resemblance to Oliver,
even if she has blue eyes and he hasn't. Wasn't it lovely how everything
came just as we wanted it to--a girl, born on father's birthday, with
blue eyes, and named Lucy? But, mother, darling, the most wonderful
thing of all was that you seemed to be with me all through it. The whole
time I was unconscious I thought you were here, and the nurse tells me
that I was calling "Mother! Mother!" all that night. Nothing ever made
me feel as close to you as having a baby of my own. I never knew before
what you were to me, and how dearly, dearly I love you.

The nurse is taking the pencil away from me.

    Your loving
    VIRGINIA.

Isn't it funny that Oliver won't take any interest in the baby at all?
He says she caused more trouble than she is worth. Was father like that?

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. April 3, 1886.
    DEAREST MOTHER:

My last letter was written an age ago, but I have been so busy since
Marthy left that I've hardly had a moment in which to draw breath. It
was a blow to me that she wouldn't stay for she was really an excellent
nurse and the baby got on so well with her, but there aren't any
coloured people of her kind here, and she got so homesick for Dinwiddie
that I thought she would lose her mind if she stayed. You know how
dependent they are upon company, and going out on Sunday afternoon and
all that kind of thing, and there really wasn't any amusement for her
except taking the baby out in the morning. She got so low spirited that
it was almost a relief when she went, but of course I feel her loss
dreadfully. I haven't let the baby out of my sight because I wouldn't
trust Daisy with her for anything in the world. She is so terribly
flighty. I have the crib brought into my room (though Oliver hates it)
and I take entire charge of her night and day. I should love to do it if
only Oliver didn't mind it so much. He says I think more of the baby now
than I do of him. Isn't that absurd? But of course she does take every
single minute of my time, and I can't dress myself for him every evening
as carefully as I used to do and look after all the housekeeping
arrangements. Daisy is a very poor cook and she simply throws the things
on the table, but it seems to me that my first duty is to the baby, so I
try to put up with the discomforts as well as I can. It is hard to eat
what she cooks since everything tastes exactly alike, but I try to
swallow as much as I can because the doctor says that if I don't keep up
my strength I shall have to stop nursing the baby. Wouldn't that be
dreadful? It almost breaks my heart to think of it, and I am sure we'd
never get any artificial food to agree with her. She is perfectly well
now, the sweetest, fattest thing you ever saw, and a real beauty, and
she is so devoted to me that she cries whenever I go out of her sight. I
am never tired of watching her, and even when she is asleep I sit
sometimes for an hour by her crib just thinking how pretty she looks
with her eyes closed and wishing you could see her. Oliver says I spoil
her to death, but how can a baby of seven months be spoiled. He doesn't
enjoy her half as much as I do, and sometimes I almost think that he
gets impatient of seeing her always in my arms. At first he absolutely
refused to have her crib brought into our room, but when I cried, he
gave in and was very sweet about it. I feel so ashamed sometimes of the
way the house looks, but there doesn't seem to be any help for it
because the doctor says if I let myself get tired it will be bad for the
baby. Of course I wouldn't put my own health before his comfort, but I
am obliged to think first of the baby, am I not? Last night, for
instance, the poor little thing was ill with colic and I was up and down
with her until daybreak. Then this morning she woke early and I had to
nurse her and give her her bath, and, added to everything else, Daisy's
cousin died and she sent word she couldn't come. I slipped on a wrapper
before taking a bath or fixing my hair and ran down to try and get
Oliver's breakfast, but the baby began to cry and he came after me and
said he wanted to make the coffee himself. Then he brought a cup
upstairs to me, but I was so tired and nervous that I couldn't drink it.
He didn't seem to understand why, feeling as badly as I did, I wouldn't
just put the baby back into her crib and make her stay there until I got
some rest, but the little thing was so wide awake that I hadn't the
heart to do it. Besides, it is so important to keep regular hours with
her, isn't it? I don't suppose a man ever realizes how a woman looks at
these things, but you will understand, won't you, mother?

I am all alone in the house to-night because a play is in town that
Oliver wanted to see and I made him go to it. He wanted to ask Mrs.
Midden to sit downstairs (she has offered over and over again to do it)
so that I might go too, but of course I wouldn't let him. I really
couldn't have enjoyed it a minute for thinking of the baby, and besides
I never cared for the theatre. Then, too, he doesn't know (for I never
tell him) how very tired I am by the time night comes. Sometimes when
Oliver comes home and we sit in the dining-room (we never use the
drawing-room, because it is across the hall and I'm afraid I shouldn't
hear the baby cry) it is as much as I can do to keep my eyes open. I try
not to let him notice it, but one night when he read me the first act of
a play he is writing, I went to sleep, and though he didn't say
anything, I could see that he was very much hurt. He worries a good deal
about my health, too, and he even went out one day and engaged a nurse
without saying anything to me about it. After I had talked to her
though, I saw that she would never do, so I sent her away before he came
home. I wish I could get really strong and feel well again, but the
doctor insists I never will until I get out of doors and use my
muscles. But you stay in the house all the time and so did grandmother,
so I don't believe there's a word of truth in what he says. Anyway, I go
out every day now with the baby.

Thank you so much for the little bands. They are just what I wanted.

    With dearest love,
    Your devoted
    VIRGINIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. June 10, 1886.
    DEAREST MOTHER:

Daisy left a week ago and we couldn't find another servant until to-day.
I must say that I prefer coloured servants. They are so much more
dependable. I didn't know until the evening before Daisy left that she
was going, and I had to send Oliver straight out to see if he could find
somebody to come in and help me. There wasn't a soul to be had until
to-day, however, so for a week I was obliged to make Oliver get his
dinner at the boarding-house. It doesn't make any difference what I have
because I haven't a particle of appetite, and I'd just as soon eat tea
and toast as anything else. Of course, but for the baby I could have
managed perfectly well--but she has been so fretful of late that she
doesn't let me put her down a minute. The doctor says her teeth are
beginning to hurt her, and that I must expect to have trouble the first
summer. She has been so well until now that he thinks it has been really
remarkable. He tells me he never knew a healthier baby, but of course I
am terribly anxious about her teething in the hot weather. If she grows
much more fretful I'm afraid I shall have to take her to the country
for July and August. It seems dreadful to leave Oliver all alone, but I
don't see how I can help it if the doctor advises me to go. Oliver has
gone to some musical comedy at the Academy to-night, and I am so tired
that I am going to bed just as soon as I finish this letter. I hope and
pray that the baby will have a quiet night. Don't you think that Daisy
treated me very badly considering how kind I had been to her? Only a
week ago when she was taken with pain in the night, I got up and made
her a mustard plaster and sat by her bed until she felt easier. The next
day I did all of her work, and yet she has so little gratitude that she
could leave me this way when she knows perfectly well that I am worried
to death about the baby's first summer. I'd give anything if I could go
home in July as you suggest, but it is such a long trip, and the heat
will probably be quite as bad in Dinwiddie as here. Of course, it would
make all the difference in the world to me to be where I could have you
to advise me about the baby, and I'd go to-morrow if it only wasn't so
far. Mrs. Midden has told me of a boarding-house in the country not more
than twenty miles from here where Oliver could come down every evening,
and we may decide to go there for a month or two. I can't help feeling
very anxious, especially as Mrs. Scott's little boy--he is just the age
of baby--was taken ill the other night, and they thought he would die
before they could get a doctor.

This letter is full of my worries, but in spite of them I am the
happiest woman that ever lived. Oliver is the best thing to me you can
imagine, and the baby is so fascinating that I enjoy every minute I am
with her. It is the greatest fun to watch her in her bath. I know you
would simply go into raptures over her--and she is so bright that she
already understands every word that I say. She grows more like Oliver
all the time, and the other day while I was watching her playing with
her rubber doll, she looked so beautiful that it almost frightened me.

I am so glad dear father is well, and what you wrote me about John
Henry's admiration for Susan interested me so much that I sat straight
down and wrote to him. Why do you think that it is only friendship and
that he isn't in love with her? If he really thinks her the "finest girl
in the world," I should imagine he was beginning to be pretty serious. I
am delighted to hear that he is going to take her to the festival. Tell
Susan from me that I shall never be satisfied until she is as happy as I
am. Mr. Treadwell was right, I believe, not to let her go to college,
though of course I want dear Susan to have whatever she sets her heart
on. But, when all is said, you were wise in teaching me that nothing
matters to a woman except love. More and more I am learning that if we
only love unselfishly enough, everything else will work out for good to
us. My little worries can't keep me from being so blissfully happy that
I want to sing all the time. Work is a joy to me because I feel that I
am doing it for Oliver and the baby. And with two such treasures to live
for I should be the most ungrateful creature alive if I ever complained.

    Your ever loving daughter,
    VIRGINIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY, July 1, 1886.
    DEAREST MOTHER:

We are leaving suddenly for the country, and I'll send our address just
as soon as we get there. The doctor thinks I ought to take the baby
away from town, so I am going to the boarding-house I wrote you about.
Oliver will come down every evening--it's only an hour's trip.

I am so tired from packing that I can't write any more.

    Lovingly,
    VIRGINIA.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. September 15, 1886.
    DEAREST MOTHER:

Here we are back again in our home, and I was never so thankful in my
life to get away from any place. I wrote you how dreadfully inconvenient
it was, but it would take pages to tell you all of my experiences in the
last few days. Such people you never saw in your life! And the food got
so uneatable that I lived on crackers for the last fortnight.
Fortunately, I was still nursing the baby, but the doctor has just told
me that I must stop. I am so distressed about it. Do you think it will
go hard with her after the first year? She is as fat and well as she can
be now, but I live in hourly terror of her getting sick. If anything
should happen to her, I believe it would kill me.

Oliver sends love. He is working very hard at the office now, and he
hates it.

    Your loving
    VIRGINIA.

I forgot to tell you that Mrs. Midden has found me such a nice servant.
She is a very young coloured girl, but looks so kind and capable, and
says she is perfectly devoted to children. Her name is Marthy, and I
feel that she's going to be a great comfort to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MATOACA CITY. October 12, 1886.
    MY DARLING MOTHER:

I was overjoyed to find your letter in the hall when I came out from
breakfast. Has it really been two weeks since I wrote to you? That seems
dreadful, but the days go by so fast that I hardly realize how long it
is between my letters.

We are all well, and Marthy has become the greatest help to me. Of
course, I don't let her do anything for the baby, but she is so careful
and trustworthy that I am going to try having her take out the carriage
in the morning. At first I shan't let her go off the block, so that I
can have my eye on her all the time. Little Lucy took a fancy to her at
once, and really enjoys playing with her. This makes it possible for me
to do a little sewing, and I am working hard trying to make over one or
two of my dresses. Oliver wants me to have a dressmaker do it, but we
have so many extra expenses all the time that I don't feel we can afford
to put out any sewing. We have spent a great deal on doctors since we
were married, but of course with a young child we can't very well expect
anything else.

And now, dearest mother, I have something to tell you, which no one
knows--not even Oliver--except Doctor Marshall and myself. We are going
to have another darling baby in March, if everything goes as it ought
to. I have kept it a secret because Oliver has had a good many business
worries, and I knew it would make him miserable. It never seems to have
entered his head that it might happen again so soon, and for his sake I
do wish we could have waited until we got a little more money in the
bank, but I suppose I oughtn't to say this because God would certainly
not send children into the world unless it was right for them to be
born. I try to remember what dear grandmamma said when somebody condoled
with her at the time she was expecting her tenth child--that she hoped
she was too good a Christian to dictate to the Lord as to how many souls
He should send into the world. As for me, I should be perfectly
delighted--it will be so much better for baby to have a little brother
or sister to play with when she gets bigger--but I can't help worrying
about Oliver's peculiar attitude of mind. I am sure that father wouldn't
have felt that way, and think how poor he has always been. Perhaps it
comes from dear Oliver having lived abroad so much and away from the
Christian influences, which have been one of the greatest blessings of
my life. I have put off telling him every day just because I dread to
think of the blow it will be to him. He is the dearest and best husband
that ever lived, and I worship the ground he walks on, but, do you know,
things are always a surprise to him when they happen? He never looks
ahead a single minute. I am sometimes afraid that he isn't the least bit
practical, and it makes him impatient when I talk to him about trying to
cut down expenses. Of course, I have to save as much as I can and I
count every single penny, or we'd never have enough money to get through
the month. I never buy a stitch for either the baby or myself, though
Oliver complains now and then that I don't dress as well as I used to
do. But how can I when I've worn the same things ever since my marriage,
besides making the baby's clothes out of my old ones? You can understand
from this how grateful I am for the check you sent--but, dearest mother,
I know that you oughtn't to have done it, and that you sacrificed your
own comfort and father's to give it to me.

I wish Oliver could get something to do in Dinwiddie. He will never be
happy here, and we could live on so much less money at home--in a little
house near the rectory.

    Your loving child,
    VIRGINIA.