THE CHANGING ORDER


"So this is life," thought Virginia, while she folded her mourning veil,
and laid it away in the top drawer of her bureau. Like all who are
suddenly brought face to face with tragedy, she felt at the moment that
there was nothing else in existence. All the sweetness of the past had
vanished so utterly that she remembered it only as one remembers a dream
from which one has abruptly awakened. Nothing remained except this
horrible sense of the pitiful insufficiency of life, of the inexorable
finality of death. It was a week since the rector's death, and in that
week she had passed out of her girlhood forever. Of all the things that
she had lived through, this alone had had the power to crush the hope in
her and the odour of crape which floated through the crack of the drawer
sickened her with its reminder of that agonized sense of loss which had
settled over her at the funeral. She was only thirty--the best of her
life should still be in the future--yet as she looked back at her white
face in the mirror it seemed to her that she should never emerge from
the leaden hopelessness which had descended like a weight on her body.
Above the harsh black of her dress, which added ten years to her
appearance, she saw the darkened circles rimming her eyes, the faded
pallor of her skin, the lustreless wave of her hair, which had once had
a satiny sheen on its ripples.

"Grief makes a person look like this," she thought. "I shall never be a
girl again--Oliver was right: I am the kind to break early." Then,
because to think of herself in the midst of such sorrow seemed to her
almost wicked, she turned away from the mirror, and laid her
crape-trimmed hat on the shelf in the wardrobe. She was wearing a dress
of black Henrietta cloth, which had been borrowed from one of her
neighbours who had worn mourning, and the blouse and sleeves hung with
an exaggerated fullness over her thin arms and bosom. All that had
distinguished her beauty--the radiance, the colour the flower-like
delicacy of bloom and sweetness--these were blotted out by her grief and
by the voluminous mourning dress of the nineties. A week had changed
her, as even Harry's illness had not changed her, from a girl into a
woman; and horrible beyond belief, with the exception of her mother, it
had changed nothing else in the universe! The tragedy that had ruined
her life had left the rest of the world--even the little world of
Dinwiddie--moving as serenely, as indifferently, on its way towards
eternity. On the morning of the funeral she had heard the same market
wagons rumble over the cobblestones, the same droning songs of the
hucksters, the same casual procession of feet on the pavement. A
passionate indignation had seized her because life could be so brutal to
death, because the terror and the pity that flamed in her soul shed no
burning light on the town where her father had worked and loved and
fought and suffered and died. A little later the ceaseless tread of
visitors to the rectory door had driven this thought from her mind, but
through every minute, while he lay in the closed room downstairs, while
she sat beside her mother in the slow crawling carriage that went to the
old churchyard, while she stood with bowed head listening to the words
of the service--through it all there had been the feeling that something
must happen to alter a world in which such a thing had been possible,
that life must stop, that the heavens must fall, that God must put forth
His hand and work a miracle in order to show His compassion and His
horror.

But nothing had changed. After the funeral her mother had come home with
her, and the others, many with tear-stained faces, had drifted in
separate ways back to eat their separate dinners. For a few hours
Dinwiddie had been shaken out of its phlegmatic pursuit of happiness;
for a few hours it had attained an emotional solidarity which swept it
up from the innumerable bypaths of the personal to a height where the
personal rises at last into the universal. Then the ebb had come; the
sense of tragedy had lessened slowly with the prolongation of feeling;
and the universal vision had dissolved and crystallized into the
pitiless physical needs of the individual. After the funeral a wave
almost of relief had swept over the town at the thought that the
suspension and the strain were at an end. The business of keeping alive,
and the moral compulsion of keeping abreast of one's neighbours,
reasserted their supremacy even while the carriages, quickening their
pace a trifle on the return drive, rolled out of the churchyard. Now at
the end of a week only Virginia and her mother would take the time from
living to sit down and remember.

In the adjoining room, which was the nursery, Mrs. Pendleton was sitting
beside the window, with her Bible open on her knees, and her head bent a
little in the direction of Miss Priscilla, who was mending a black dress
by the table.

"It is so sweet of you, dear Miss Priscilla," she murmured in her vague
and gentle voice as Virginia entered. So old, so pallid, so fragile she
looked, that she might have been mistaken by a stranger for a woman of
eighty, yet the impossibility of breaking the habit of a lifetime kept
the lines of her face still fixed in an expression of anxious
cheerfulness. For more than forty years she had not thought of herself,
and now that the opportunity had come for her to do so, she found that
she had almost forgotten the way that one went about it. Even grief
could not make her selfish any more than it could make her untidy. Her
manner, like her dress, was so little a matter of impulse, and so
largely a matter of discipline and of conscience, that it expressed her
broken heart hardly more than did the widow's cap on her head or the
mourning brooch that fastened the crape folds of her collar.

"Do you want anything, mother darling? What can I do for you?" asked
Virginia, stooping to kiss her.

"Nothing, dear. I was just telling Miss Priscilla that I had had a visit
from Mr. Treadwell, and that"--her voice quivered a little--"he showed
more feeling than I should have believed possible. He even wanted to
make me an allowance."

Miss Priscilla drew out her large linen handkerchief, which was like a
man's, and loudly blew her nose. "I always said there was more in Cyrus
than people thought," she observed. "Here, I've shortened this dress,
Jinny, until it's just about your mother's length."

She tried to speak carelessly, for though she did not concur in the
popular belief that to ignore sorrow is to assuage it, her social
instinct, which was as strongly developed as Mrs. Pendleton's,
encouraged her to throw a pleasant veil over affliction.

"You're looking pale for want of air, Jinny," she added, after a minute
in which she had thought, "The child has broken so in the last few days
that she looks years older than Oliver."

"I'm trying to make her go driving," said Mrs. Pendleton, leaning
forward over the open page of her Bible.

"But I can't go, mother; I haven't the heart for it," replied Virginia,
choking down a sob.

"I don't like to see you looking so badly, dear. You must keep up your
strength for the children's sake, you know."

"Yes, I know," answered Virginia, but her voice had a weary sound.

A little later, when Miss Priscilla had gone, and Oliver came in to urge
her to go with him, she shook her head again, still palely resolute,
still softly obstinate.

"But, Jinny, it isn't right for you to let your health go," he urged.
"You haven't had a breath of air for days and you're getting sallow."

His own colour was as fine as ever; he grew handsomer, if a trifle
stouter, as he grew older; and at thirty-five there was all the vigour
and the charm of twenty in his face and manner. In one way only he had
altered, and of this alteration, he, as well as Virginia, was beginning
faintly to be aware. Comfort was almost imperceptibly taking the place
of conviction, and the passionate altruism of youth would yield before
many years to the prudential philosophy of middle-age. Life had defeated
him. His best had been thrown back at him, and his nature, embittered by
failure, was adjusting itself gradually to a different and a lower
standard of values. Though he could not be successful, it was still
possible, even within the narrow limits of his income and his
opportunities, to be comfortable. And, like other men who have lived day
by day with heroically unselfish women, he had fallen at last into the
habit of thinking that his being comfortable was, after all, a question
of supreme importance to the universe. Deeply as he had felt the
rector's death, he, in common with the rest of Dinwiddie, was conscious
of breathing more easily after the funeral was over. To his
impressionable nature, alternations of mood were almost an essential of
being, and there was something intolerable to him in any slowly
harrowing grief. To watch Virginia nursing every memory of her father
because she shrank from the subtle disloyalty of forgetfulness, aroused
in him a curious mingling of sympathy and resentment.

"I wish you'd go, even if you don't feel like it--just to please me,
Virginia," he urged, and after a short struggle she yielded to his
altered tone, and got down her hat from the shelf of the wardrobe.

A little later, as the dog-cart rolled out of Dinwiddie into the country
road, she looked through her black grenadine veil on a world which
appeared to have lost its brightness. The road was the one along which
she had ridden on the morning of the fox-hunt; ahead of them lay the
same fields, sown now with the tender green of the spring; the same
creeks ran there, screened by the same thickets of elder; the same pines
wafted their tang on the March wind that blew, singing, out of the
forest. It was all just as it had been on that morning--and yet what a
difference!

"Put up your veil, Virginia--it's enough to smother you."

But she only shook her head, shrinking farther down into the shapeless
borrowed dress as though she felt that it protected her. Following the
habit of people whose choice has been instinctive rather than
deliberate, a choice of the blood, not of the brain, they had long ago
exhausted the fund of conversation with which they had started. There
was nothing to talk about--since Virginia had never learned to talk of
herself, and Oliver had grown reticent recently about the subjects that
interested him. When the daily anecdotes of the children had been aired
between them with an effort at breeziness, nothing remained except the
endless discussion of Harry's education. Even this had worn threadbare
of late, and with the best intentions in the world, Virginia had failed
to supply anything else of sufficient importance to take its place. An
inherited habit, the same habit which had made it possible for Mrs.
Pendleton to efface her broken heart, prompted her to avoid any allusion
to her grief in which she sat shrouded as in her mourning veil.

"The spring is so early this year," she remarked once, with her gaze on
the rosy billows of an orchard. "The peach trees have almost finished
blooming."

Then, as he made no answer except to flick at John Henry's bay mare
with his whip, she asked daringly, "Are you writing again, Oliver?"

A frown darkened his forehead, and she saw the muscles about his mouth
twitch as though he were irritated. For all his failure and his
bitterness, he did not look a day older, she thought, than when she had
first seen him driving down High Street in that unforgettable May. He
was still as ardent, still as capable of inspiring first love in the
imagination of a girl. The light and the perfume of that enchanted
spring seemed suddenly to envelop her, and moved by a yearning to
recapture them for an instant, she drew closer to him, and slipped her
hand through his arm.

"Oh, I'm trying my luck with some trash. Nothing but trash has any
chance of going in this damned business."

"You mean it's different from your others? It's less serious?"

"Less serious? Well, I should say so. It's the sort of ice-cream
soda-water the public wants. But if I can get it put on, it ought to
run, and a play that runs is obliged to make money. I doubt if there's
anything much better than money, when it comes to that."

"You used to say it didn't matter."

"Did I? Well, I was a fool and I've learned better. These last few years
have taught me that nothing else on earth matters much."

This was so different from what that other Oliver--the Oliver of her
first love--might have said, that involuntarily her clasp on his arm
tightened. The change in him, so gradual at first that her mind, unused
to subtleties, had hardly grasped it, was beginning to frighten her.

"You have such burdens, dear," she said, and he noticed that her voice
had acquired the toneless sweetness of her mother's. "I've tried to be
as saving as I could, but the children have been sick so much that it
seems sometimes as if we should never get out of debt. I am trying now
to pay off the bills I was obliged to make while Harry was ill in
October. If I could only get perfectly strong, we might let Marthy go,
now that Jenny is getting so big."

"You work hard enough as it is, Virginia. You've been awfully good about
it," he answered, but his manner was almost casual, for he had grown to
take for granted her unselfishness with something of the unconcern with
which he took for granted the comfortable feeling of the spring weather.
In the early days of their marriage, when her fresh beauty had been a
power to rule him, she had taught him to assume his right to her
self-immolation on the altar of his comfort; and with the taste of
bitterness which sometimes follows the sweets of memory, she recalled
that their first quarrel had arisen because she had insisted on getting
out of bed to make the fires in the morning. Then, partly because the
recollection appeared to reproach him, and partly because, not
possessing the critical faculty, she had never learned to acknowledge
the existence of a flaw in a person she loved, she edged closer to him,
and replied cheerfully:

"I don't mind the work a bit, if only the children will keep well so we
shan't have to spend any more money. I shan't need any black clothes,"
she added, with a trembling lip. "Mrs. Carrington has given me this
dress, as she has gone out of mourning, and I've got a piece of blue
silk put away that I am going to have dyed."

He glanced at the shapeless dress, not indignantly as he would once have
done, but with a tinge of quiet amusement.

"It makes you look every day of forty."

"I know it isn't becoming, but at least it will save having to buy one."

In spite of the fact that her small economies had made it possible for
them to live wholesomely, and with at least an appearance of decency, on
his meagre salary, they had always aroused in him a sense of bitter
exasperation. He respected her, of course, for her saving, yet in his
heart he knew that she would probably have charmed him more had she been
a spendthrift--since the little virtues are sometimes more deadly to the
passion of love than are the large vices. While he nodded, without
disputing the sound common sense in her words, she thought a little
wistfully how nice it would be to have pretty things if only one could
afford them. Someday, when the children's schooling was over and Oliver
had got a larger salary, she would begin to buy clothes that were
becoming rather than durable. But that was in the future, and,
meanwhile, how much better it was to grudge every penny she spent on
herself as long as there were unpaid bills at the doctor's and the
grocer's. All of which was, of course, perfectly reasonable, and like
other women who have had a narrow experience of life, she cherished the
delusion that a man's love, as well as his philosophy, is necessarily
rooted in reason.

When they turned homeward, the bay mare, pricked by desire for her
stable, began to travel more rapidly, and the fall of her hoofs,
accompanied by the light roll of the wheels, broke the silence which had
almost imperceptibly settled upon them. Not until the cart drew up at
the gate did Virginia realize that they had hardly spoken a dozen words
on the drive back.

"I feel better already, Oliver," she said, gratefully, as he helped her
to alight. Then hastening ahead of him, she ran up the walk and into the
hall, where her mother, looking wan and unnatural in her widow's cap,
greeted her with the question:

"Did you have a pleasant drive, dear?"

       *       *       *       *       *

For six months Mrs. Pendleton hid her broken heart under a smile and
went softly about the small daily duties of the household, facing death,
as she had faced life, with a sublime unselfishness and the manner of a
lady. Her hopes, her joys, her fears even, lay in the past; there was
nothing for her to look forward to, nothing for her to dread in the
future. Life had given her all that it had to offer of bliss or sorrow,
and for the rest of her few years she would be like one who, having
finished her work before the end of the day, sits waiting patiently for
the words of release to be spoken. As the months went on, she moved like
a gentle shadow about her daughter's little home. So wasted and pallid
was her body that at times Virginia feared to touch her lest she should
melt like a phantom out of her arms. Yet to the last she never faltered,
never cried out for mercy, never sought to hasten by a breath that end
which was to her as the longing of her eyes, as the brightness of the
sunlight, as the sweetness of the springtime. Once, looking up from
Lucy's lesson which she was hearing, she said a little wistfully, "I
don't think, Jinny, it will be long now," and then checking herself
reproachfully, she added, "But God knows best. I can trust Him."

It was the only time that she had ever spoken of the thought which was
in her mind day and night, for when she could no longer welcome her
destiny, she had accepted it. Her faith, like her opinions, was
child-like and uncritical--the artless product of a simple and incurious
age. The strength in her had gone not into the building of knowledge,
but into the making of character, and she had judged all thought as
innocently as she had judged all literature, by its contribution to the
external sweetness of living. A child of ten might have demolished her
theories, and yet because of them, or in spite of them, she had
translated into action the end of all reasoning, the profoundest meaning
in all philosophy. But she was born to decorate instead of to reason.
Though her mind had never winnowed illusions from realities, her hands
had patiently woven both illusions and realities into the embroidered
fabric of Life.

For six months she went about the house and helped Virginia with the
sewing, which had become burdensome since the children, and especially
Harry, were big enough to wear daily holes in their stockings. Then,
when the half year was over, she took to her bed one evening after she
had carefully undressed, folded her clothes out of sight, and read a
chapter in her Bible. In the morning she did not get up, and at the end
of a fortnight, in which she apologized for making extra work whenever
food was brought to her, she clasped her hands on her thin breast,
smiled once into Virginia's face, and died so quietly that there was
hardly a perceptible change in her breathing. She had gone through life
without giving trouble, and she gave none at the end. As she lay there
in her little bed in Virginia's spare room, to which she had moved after
Gabriel's death in order that the rectory might be got ready for the new
rector, she appeared so shadowy and unearthly that it was impossible to
believe that she had ever been a part of the restless strivings and the
sombre violences of life. On the candle-stand by her bed lay her
spectacles, with steel rims because she had never felt that she could
afford gold ones; and a single October rose, from which a golden petal
had dropped, stood in a vase beside the Bible. On the foot of the bed
hung her grey flannelette wrapper, with a patch in one sleeve over which
Harry had spilled a bottle of shoe polish, while through the
half-shuttered window the autumn sunshine fell in long yellow bars over
the hemp rugs on the floor. And she was dead! Her mother was dead--no
matter how much she needed her, she would never come back. Out of the
vacancy around her, some words of her own, spoken in her girlhood,
returned to her. "There is only one thing I couldn't bear, and that is
losing my mother." Only one thing! And now that one thing had happened,
and she was not only bearing it, she was looking ahead to a future in
which that one thing would be always beside her, always in her memory.
Whatever the years brought to her, they could never bring her mother
again--they could never bring her a love like her mother's.

Out of that same vacancy, which seemed to swallow and to hold
everything, which seemed to exist both within and outside of herself, a
multitude of forgotten images and impressions flashed into being. She
saw the nursery fireside in the rectory, and her mother, with hair that
still shone like satin, rocking back and forth in the black wicker chair
with the sagging bottom. She saw her kneeling on the old frayed red and
blue drugget, her skirt pinned up at the back of her waist, while she
bathed her daughter's scratched and aching feet in the oblong tin
foot-tub. She saw her, as beautiful as an angel, in church on Sunday
mornings, her worshipful eyes lifted to the pulpit, an edge of
tinted light falling on the open prayer-book in her hand. She saw
her, thin and stooping, a shadow of all that she had once
been--waiting--waiting----She had always been there. It was impossible
to realize that a time could ever come when she would not be there--and
now she was gone!

And behind all the images, all the impressions, the stubborn thought
persisted that this was life--that one could never escape it--that
whatever happened, one must come back to it at the last. "I have my
children still left--but for my children I could not live!" she thought,
dropping on her knees by the bedside, and hiding her face in the grey
wrapper.

       *       *       *       *       *

After this it seemed to her that she ceased to live except in the lives
of her children, and her days passed so evenly, so monotonously, that
she only noticed their flight when one of the old people in Dinwiddie
remarked to her with a certain surprise: "You've almost a grown
daughter now, Jinny," or "Harry will soon be getting as big as his
father. Have you decided where you will send him to college?" She was
not unhappy--had she ever stopped to ask herself the question, she would
probably have answered, "If only mother and father were living, I should
be perfectly satisfied"; yet in spite of her assurances, there existed
deep down in her--so deep that her consciousness had never fully grasped
the fact of its presence--a dumb feeling that something was missing out
of life, that the actuality was a little less bright, a little less
perfect than it had appeared through the rosy glamour of her virgin
dreams. Was this "something missing" merely one of the necessary
conditions of mortal existence? Or was there somewhere on the earth that
stainless happiness which she had once believed her marriage would bring
to her? "I should be perfectly satisfied if only----" she would
sometimes say in the night, and then check herself before she had ended
the sentence. The lack, real as it was, was still too formless to lend
itself to the precision of words; it belonged less to circumstances than
to the essential structure of life. And yet, as she put it to herself in
her rare moments of depression, she had so much to be thankful for! The
children grew stronger as they grew older--since Harry's attack of
diphtheria, indeed, there had been no serious illness in the family, and
as she approached middle-age, her terror of illness increased rather
than diminished. The children made up for much--they ought to have made
up for everything--and yet did they? There was no visible fault that she
could attribute to them. With her temperamental inability to see flaws,
she was accustomed to think of them as perfect children, as children
whom she would not change, had she the power, by so much as a hair or an
outline. They grew up, straight, fine, and fearless, full of the new
spirit, eager to test life, to examine facts, possessed by that
awakening feeling for truth which had always frightened her a little in
Susan. Vaguely, without defining the sensation, she felt that they were
growing beyond her, that she could no longer keep up with them, that,
every year, they were leaving her a little farther behind them. They
were fond of her, but she understood from something Jenny said one day,
that they had ceased to be proud of her. It was while they were looking
over an old photograph album of Susan's that, coming to a picture of
Virginia, taken the week before her wedding, Jenny cried out: "Why,
there's mother!" and slipped it out of the page.

"I never saw that before," Lucy said, leaning over with a laugh. "You
were so young when you married, mother, and you wore such tight sleeves,
and a bustle!"

"Would you ever have believed she was as pretty as that?" asked Jenny,
with the unconscious brutality of childhood.

"If you are ever as beautiful as your mother was, you may thank your
stars," said Susan dryly, and by the expression in her face Virginia
knew that she was thinking, "If that was my child, I'd slap her!"

Harry, who had been stuffing fruitcake on the sofa--sweets were his
weakness--rose suddenly and came over to the group.

"If you are ever as beautiful as she is now, you may thank your stars,
Miss Yellow Frisk!" he remarked crushingly.

It was a little thing--so little that it seemed ridiculous to think of
it as among the momentous happenings in a life--but with that
extraordinary proneness of the little to usurp the significant places of
memory, it had become at last one of the important milestones in her
experience. At the end, when she forgot everything else, she would not
forget Harry's foolish words, nor the look in his indignant boyish face
when he uttered them. Until then she had not admitted to herself that
there was a difference in her feeling for her children, but with the
touch of his sympathetic, not over clean, hand on her shoulder, she knew
that she should never again think of the three of them as if they were
one in her interest and her love. The girls were good children, dear
children--she would have let herself be cut in pieces for either of them
had it been necessary--but between Harry and herself there was a
different bond, a closer and a deeper dependency, which strengthened
almost insensibly as he grew older. Her daughters she loved, but her
son, as is the inexplicable way of women, she adored blindly and without
wisdom. If it had been possible to ruin him, she would have done so,
but, unlike many other sons, he seemed, by virtue of that invincible
strength with which he had been born, to be proof against both spoiling
and flattery. He was a nice boy even to strangers, even to Susan, with
her serene judgment of persons, he appeared a thoroughly nice boy! He
was not only a tall, lean, habitually towselled-headed youngster, with a
handsome sunburned face and a pair of charming, slightly quizzical blue
eyes, but he was, as his teachers and his school reports bore witness,
possessed of an intellectual brilliancy which made study as easy, and
quite as interesting to him, as play. Unlike his father, he had entered
life endowed with a cheerful outlook upon the world and with that
temperament of success which usually, but by no means inevitably,
accompanies it. Whatever happened, he would make the best of it, he
would "get on," and it was impossible to imagine him in any hole so deep
that he could not, sooner or later, find the way out of it. The
Pendleton and the Treadwell spirits had contributed their best to him.
If he derived from Cyrus, or from some obscure strain in Cyrus's
ancestry, a wholesome regard for material success, a robust
determination to achieve results combined with that hard, clear vision
of affairs which makes such achievement easy, he had inherited from
Gabriel his genial temper, his charm of manner, and his faith in life,
which, though it failed to move mountains, had sweetened and enriched
the mere act of living. Though he was less demonstrative than Lucy, who
had outgrown the plainness and the reticence of her childhood and was
developing into a coquettish, shallow-minded girl, with what Miss
Priscilla called "a glib tongue," Virginia learned gradually, in the
secret way mothers learn things, that his love for her was, after his
ambition, the strongest force in his character. Between him and his
father there had existed ever since his babyhood a curious, silent, yet
ineradicable hostility. Whether the fault was Oliver's or Harry's,
whether the father resented the energy and the initiative of his son, or
the son resented the indifference and the self-absorption of his father,
Virginia had never discovered. For years she fought against admitting
the discord between them. Then, at last, on the occasion of a quarrel,
when it was no longer possible to dissemble, she followed Oliver into
his study, which had once been the "back parlour," and pleaded with him
to show a little patience, a little sympathy with his son. "He's a boy
any father would be proud of----" she finished, almost in tears.

"I know he is," he answered irritably, "but the truth is he rubs me the
wrong way. I suppose the trouble is that you have spoiled him."

"But he isn't spoiled. Everybody says----"

"Oh, everybody!" he murmured disdainfully, with a shrug of his fine
shoulders.

He looked back at her with the sombre fire of anger still in his eyes,
and she saw, without trying to see, without even knowing that she did
see, all the changes that years had wrought in his appearance.
Physically, he was a finer animal than he had been when she married him,
for time, which had sapped her youth and faded her too delicate bloom,
had but added a deeper colour to the warm brown of his skin, a steadier
glow to his eyes, a more silvery gloss to his hair. At forty, he was a
handsomer man than he had been at twenty-five, yet, in spite of this,
some virtue had gone out of him--here, too, as in life, "something was
missing." The generous impulses, the high heart for adventure, the
enthusiasm of youth, and youth's white rage for perfection--where were
these? It was as if a rough hand had passed over him, coarsening here,
blotting out there, accentuating elsewhere. The slow, insidious devil of
compromise had done its work. Once he had made one of the small band of
fighters who fight not for advantage, but for the truth; now he stood in
that middle place with the safe majority who are "neither for God nor
for His enemies." Life had done this to him--life and Virginia. It was
not only that he had "grown soft," as he would have expressed it, nor
was it even wholly that he had grown selfish, for the canker which ate
at the roots of his personality had affected not his character merely,
but the very force of his will. Though the imperative he obeyed had
always been not "I must," but "I want," his natural loftiness of purpose
might have saved him from the results of his weakness had he not lost
gradually the capacity for successful resistance with which he had
started. If only in the beginning she had upheld not his inclinations,
but his convictions; if only she had sought not to soothe his weakness,
but to stimulate his strength; if only she had seen for once the thing
as it was, not as it ought to have been----

He was buried in his work now, and there were months during this year
when she appeared hardly to see him, so engrossed, so self-absorbed had
he become. Sometimes she would remember, stifling the pang it caused,
the nights when he had written his first plays in Matoaca City, and that
he had made her sit beside him with her sewing because he could not
think if she were out of the room. Now, he could write only when he was
alone; he hated an interruption so much that she often let the fire go
out rather than open his closed door to see if it was burning. If she
went in to speak to him, he laid his pen down and did not take it up
again while she was there. Yet this change had come so stealthily that
it had hardly affected her happiness. She had grown accustomed to the
difference before she had realized it sufficiently to suffer. Sometimes
she would say to herself a little wonderingly, "Oliver used to be so
romantic;" for with the majority of women whose marriages have
surrendered to an invasion of the commonplace, she accepted the
comfortable theory that the alteration was due less to circumstances
than to the natural drying of the springs of sentiment in her husband's
character. Occasionally, she would remember with a smile her three days'
jealousy of Abby; but the brevity and the folly of this had established
her the more securely in her impregnable position of unquestioning
belief in him. She had started life believing, as the women of her race
had believed for ages before her, that love was a divine gift which came
but once in a lifetime, and which, coming once, remained forever
indestructible. People, of course, grew more practical and less intense
as they left youth farther behind them; and though this misty principle
would have dissolved at once had she applied it to herself (for she
became more sentimental as she approached middle-age), behind any
suspicious haziness of generalization there remained always the sacred
formula, "Men are different." Once, when a sharp outbreak of the primal
force had precipitated a scandal in the home of one of her neighbours,
she had remarked to Susan that she was "devoutly thankful that Oliver
did not have that side to his nature."

"It must be a disagreeable side to live with," Susan, happily married to
John Henry, and blissfully expectant of motherhood, had replied, "but as
far as I know, Oliver never had a light fancy for a woman in his
life--not even before he was married. I used to tell him that it was
because he expected too much. Physical beauty by itself never seemed to
attract him--it was the angel in you that he first fell in love with."

A glow of pleasure flushed Virginia's sharpened features, mounting to
the thin little curls on her forehead. These little curls, to which she
sentimentally clung in spite of the changes in the fashions, were a
cause of ceaseless worry to Lucy, who had developed into a "stylish"
girl, and would have died sooner than she would have rejected the
universal pompadour of the period. It was the single vanity that
Virginia had ever permitted herself, this adhering at middle-age to the
quaint and rather coquettish hairdressing of her girlhood: and Fate had
punished her by threading the little curls with grey, while Susan's
stiff roll (she had adopted the newer mode) remained bravely flaxen. But
Susan was one of those women who, lacking a fine fair skin and defying
tradition, are physically at their best between forty and fifty.

"Oliver used to be so romantic," said Virginia, as she had said so often
to herself, while the glow paled slowly from her cheeks, leaving them
the colour of faded rose-leaves.

"Not so romantic as you were, Jinny."

"Oh, I am still," she laughed softly. "Lucy says I take more interest in
her lovers now than she does," and she added after a minute, "Girls are
so different to-day from what they used to be--they are so much less
sentimental."

"But I thought Lucy was. She has enough flirtations for her age, hasn't
she?"

"She has enough attention, of course--for the funny part is that, though
she's only sixteen and not nearly so pretty as Jenny, the men are all
crazy, as Miss Willy says, about her. But, somehow, it's different. Lucy
enjoys it, but it isn't her life. As for Jenny, she's still too young to
have taken shape, I suppose, but she has only one idea in her head and
that is going to college. She never gives a boy a thought."

"That's queer, because she promises already to be the most beautiful
girl in Dinwiddie."

"She is beautiful. I am quite sure that it isn't because she is my
daughter that I think so. But, all the same, I'm afraid she'll never be
as popular as Lucy is. She is so distant and overbearing to men that
they are shy of her."

"And you'll let her go to college?"

"If we can afford it--and now that Oliver hopes to get one of his plays
put on, we may have a little more money. But it seems such a waste to
me. I never saw that it could possibly do a woman any good to go to
college--though of course I always sympathized with your disappointment,
dear Susan. Jenny is bent on it now, but I feel so strongly that it
would be better for her to come out in Dinwiddie and go to parties and
have attention."

"And does Oliver feel that, too?"

"Oh, he doesn't care. Jenny is his favourite, and he will let her do
anything he thinks she has set her heart on. But he has never put his
whole life into the children's as I have done."

"But if she goes, will you be able to send Harry?"

"Of course, Harry's education must come before everything else--even
Oliver realizes that. Do you know, I've hardly bought a match for ten
years that I haven't stopped to ask myself if it would take anything
from Harry's education. That's why I've gone as shabby as this almost
ever since he was born--that and my longing to give the girls a few
pretty things."

"You haven't bought a dress for yourself since I can remember. I should
think you would wear your clothes out making them over."

The look in Virginia's face showed that the recollection Susan had
invoked was not entirely a pleasant one.

"I've done with as little as I could," she answered. "Only once was I
really extravagant, and that was when I bought a light blue silk which I
didn't have made up until years afterwards when it was dyed black. Dyed
things never hold their own," she concluded pensively.

"You are too unselfish--that is your only fault," said Susan
impulsively. "I hope they appreciate all you have been to them."

"Oh, they appreciate me," returned Virginia with a laugh. "Harry does,
anyhow."

"I believe Harry is your darling, Jinny."

"I try not to make any difference in my feeling--they are all the best
children that ever lived--but--Susan, I wouldn't breathe this to anybody
on earth but you--I can't help thinking that Harry loves me more than
the others do. He--he has so much more patience with me. The girls
sometimes laugh at me because I am old-fashioned and behind the times,
and I can see that it annoys them because I am ignorant of things which
they seem to have been born knowing."

"But it was for their sake that you let yourself go--you gave up
everything else for them from the minute that they were born."

A tear shone in Virginia's eye, and Susan knew, without having it put
into words, that a wound somewhere in that gentle heart was still
hurting. "I'd like to slap them!" she thought fiercely, and then she
said aloud with a manner of cheerful conviction:

"You are a great deal too good for them, Jinny, and some day they will
know it."

A longing came over her to take the thin little figure in her arms and
shake back into her something of the sparkle and the radiance of her
girlhood. Why did beauty fade? Why did youth grow middle-aged? Above
all, why did love and sacrifice so often work their own punishment?