THE PROBLEM OF THE SOUTH


"Father, I want to marry John Henry," said Susan, just as she had said
almost ten years ago, "Father, I want to go to college."

It was a March afternoon, ashen and windy, with flocks of small fleecy
clouds hurrying across a changeable blue sky, and the vague, roving
scents of early spring in the air. After his dinner, which he had taken
for more than fifty years precisely at two o'clock, Cyrus had sat down
for a peaceful pipe on the back porch before returning to the office.
Between the sunken bricks in the little walled-in yard, blades of vivid
green grass had shot up, seeking light out of darkness, and along the
grey wooden ledge of the area the dauntless sunflowers were unfolding
their small stunted leaves. On the railing of the porch a moth-eaten
cat--the only animal for whom Cyrus entertained the remotest
respect--was contentedly licking the shabby fur on her side.

"Father, I want to marry John Henry," repeated Susan, raising her voice
to a higher key and towering like a flesh and blood image of Victory
over the sagging cane chair in which he sat.

Taking his pipe from his mouth, he looked up at her; and so little had
he altered in ten years, that the thought flashed through her mind that
he had actually suffered no change of expression since the afternoon on
which she had asked him to send her to college. As a man he may not have
been impressive, but as a defeating force who could say that he had not
attained his fulfilment? It was as if the instinct of patriarchal
tyranny had entrenched itself in his person as in a last stronghold of
the disappearing order. When he died many things would pass away out of
Dinwiddie--not only the soul and body of Cyrus Treadwell, but the
vanishing myth of the "strong man," the rule of the individual despot,
the belief in the inalienable right of the father to demand blood
sacrifices. For in common with other men of his type, he stood equally
for industrial advancement and for domestic immobility. The body social
might move, but the units that formed the body social must remain
stationary.

"Well, I don't think I'd worry about marrying, if I were you," he
replied, not unkindly, for Susan inspired him with a respect against
which he had struggled in vain. "You are very comfortable now, ain't
you? And I'll see that you are well provided for after my death. John
Henry hasn't anything except his salary, I reckon."

Marriage as an economic necessity was perfectly comprehensible to him,
but it was difficult for him to conceive of anybody indulging in it
simply as a matter of sentiment. That April afternoon was so far away
now that it had ceased to exist even as an historical precedent.

"Yes, but I want to marry him, and I am going to," replied Susan
decisively.

"What arrangements would you make about your mother? It seems to me that
your mother needs your attention."

"Of course I couldn't leave mother. If you agree to it, John Henry is
willing to come here to live as long as I have to look after her. If
not, I shall take her away with me; I have spoken to her, and she is
perfectly willing to go."

The ten years which had left Cyrus at a standstill had developed his
daughter from a girl into a woman. She spoke with the manner of one who
realizes that she holds the situation in her hands, and he yielded to
this assumption of strength as he would have yielded ten years ago had
she been clever enough to use it against him. It was his own manner in a
more attractive guise, if he had only known it; and the Treadwell
determination to get the thing it wanted most was asserting itself in
Susan's desire to win John Henry quite as effectively as it had asserted
itself in Cyrus's passion to possess the Dinwiddie and Central Railroad.
Though the ends were different, the quality which moved father and
daughter towards these different ends was precisely the same. In Cyrus,
it was force degraded; in Susan, it was force refined; but the peculiar
attribute which distinguished and united them was the possession of the
power to command events.

"Take your mother away?" he repeated. "Why, where on earth would you
take her?"

"Then you'll have to agree to John Henry's coming here. It won't make
any difference to you, of course. You needn't see him except at the
table."

"But what would James say about it?" he returned, with the cowardice
natural to the habitual bully. The girl had character, certainly, and
though he disliked character in a woman, he was obliged to admit that
she had not failed to make an impression.

"James won't care, and besides," she added magnificently, "it is none of
his business."

"And it's none of mine, either, I reckon," said Cyrus, with a chuckle.

"Well, of course, it's more of mine," agreed Susan, and her delicious
laugh drowned his chuckle.

She had won her point, and strange to say, she had pleased him rather
than otherwise. He had suddenly a comfortable feeling in his digestive
organs as well as a sense of virtue in his soul. It was impossible not
to feel proud of her as she towered there above him with her superb
body, as fine and as supple as the body of a race horse, and her
splendid courage that made him wish while he looked at her that she,
instead of James, had been born a male. She was not pretty--she had
never been pretty--but he realized for the first time that there might
be something better even for a woman than beauty.

"Thank you, father," she said as she turned away, and he was glad again
to feel that she had conquered him. To be conquered by one's own blood
was different from being conquered by a business acquaintance.

"You mustn't disturb the household, you know," he said, but his voice
did not sound as dry as he had endeavoured to make it.

"I shan't disturb anybody," responded Susan, with the amiability of a
woman who, having gained her point, can afford to be pleasant. Then,
wheeling about suddenly on the threshold, she added, "By the way, I
forgot to tell you that Mandy was here three times this morning asking
to see you. She is in trouble about her son. He was arrested for
shooting a policeman over at Cross's Corner, you know, and the people
down there are so enraged, she's afraid of a lynching. You read about it
in the paper, didn't you?"

Yes, he had read about the shooting--Cross's Corner was only three miles
away--but, if he had ever known the name of Mandy's son, he had
forgotten it so completely that seeing it in print had suggested nothing
to his mind.

"Well, she doesn't expect me to interfere, does she?" he asked shortly.

"I believe she thought you might go over and do something--I don't know
what--help her engage a lawyer probably. She was very pitiable, but
after all, what can one do for a negro that shoots a policeman? There's
Miss Willy calling me!"

She ran indoors, and taking his pipe, which was still smoking, from his
mouth, Cyrus leaned back in his chair and stared intently at the small
fleecy clouds in the west. The cat, having cleaned herself to her
satisfaction, jumped down from the railing, and after rubbing against
his thin legs, leaped gently into his lap.

"Tut-tut!" he remarked grimly; but he did not attempt to dislodge the
animal, and it may be that some secret part of him was gratified by the
attention. He was still sitting there some minutes later, when he heard
the warning click of the back gate, and the figure of Mandy, appeared at
the corner of the kitchen wall. Rising from his chair, he shook the cat
from his knees, and descending the steps, met the woman in the centre of
the walk, where a few hardy dandelions were flattened like buttons
between the bricks.

"Howdy, Mandy. I'm sorry to hear that you're having trouble with that
boy of yours." He saw at once that she was racked by a powerful emotion,
and any emotion affected him unpleasantly as something extravagant and
indecent. Sweat had broken out in glistening clusters over her face and
neck, and her eyes, under the stray wisps of hair, had in them an
expression of dumb and uncomprehending submission.

"Ain't you gwineter git 'im away, Marster?" she began, and stronger even
than her terror was the awe of Cyrus which subdued her voice to a tone
of servile entreaty.

"Why did he shoot a policeman? He knew he'd hang for it," returned Cyrus
sharply, and he added, "Of course I can't get him away. He'll have to
take his deserts. Your race has got to learn that when you break the
law, you must pay for it."

At first he had made as if to push by her, but when she did not move, he
thought better of it and waited for her to speak. The sound of her heavy
breathing, like the breathing of some crouching beast, awoke in him a
curious repulsion. If only one could get rid of such creatures after
their first youth was over! If only every careless act could perish with
the impulse that led to it! If only the dried husks of pleasure did not
turn to weapons against one! These thoughts--or disjointed snatches of
thoughts like these--passed in a confused whirl through his brain as he
stood there. For an instant it was almost as if his accustomed lucidity
of purpose had deserted him; then the disturbance ceased, and with the
renewal of order in his mind, his life-long habit of prompt decision
returned to him.

"Your race has got to learn that when you break the law you must pay for
it," he repeated--for on that sound principle of justice he felt that he
must unalterably take his stand.

"He's all de boy I'se got, Marster," rejoined the negress, with an
indifference to the matter of justice which had led others of her colour
into those subterranean ways where abstract principles are not. "You
ain' done furgot 'im, Marster," she added piteously. "He 'uz born jes
two mont's atter Miss Lindy turnt me outer hyer--en he's jes ez w'ite ez
ef'n he b'longed ter w'ite folks."

But she had gone too far--she had outraged that curious Anglo-Saxon
instinct in Cyrus which permitted him to sin against his race's
integrity, yet forbade him to acknowledge, even to himself, that he bore
any part in the consequences of that sin. Illogical, he might have
admitted, but there are some truths so poisonous that no honest man
could breathe the same air with them.

Taking out his pocket-book, he slowly drew a fifty dollar bill from its
innermost recesses, and as slowly unfolded it. He always handled money
in that careful fashion--a habit which he had inherited from his father
and his grandfather before him, and of which he was entirely
unconscious. Filtering down through so many generations, the mannerism
had ceased at last to be merely a physical peculiarity, and had become
strangely spiritual in its suggestion. The craving for possession, the
singleness of desire, the tenacity of grasp, the dread of
relinquishment, the cold-blooded determination to keep intact the thing
which it had cost so much to acquire--all that was bound up in the
spirit of Cyrus Treadwell, and all that would pass at last with that
spirit from off the earth, was expressed in the gesture with which he
held out the bit of paper to the woman who had asked for his help. "Take
this--it is all I can do for you," he said, "and don't come whining
around me any more. Black or white, the man that commits a murder has
got to hang for it."

A sound broke from the negress that resembled a human cry of grief less
than it did the inarticulate moan of an animal in mortal pain. Then it
stopped suddenly, strangled by that dull weight of usage beneath which
the primal impulse in her was crushed back into silence. Instinctively,
as if in obedience to some reflex action, she reached out and took the
money from his hand, and still instinctively, with the dazed look of one
who performs in delirium the customary movements of every day, she fell
back, holding her apron deprecatingly aside while he brushed past her.
And in her eyes as she gazed after him there dawned the simple wonder of
the brute that asks of Life why it suffers.

Beyond the alley into which the gate opened, Cyrus caught sight of
Gabriel's erect figure hurrying down the side street in the direction of
the Old Ladies' Home, and calling out to him, he scrambled over the ash
heaps and tomato cans, and emerged, irritated but smiling, into the
sunlight.

"I'm on my way to the bank. We'll walk down together," he remarked
almost gently, for, though he disapproved of Gabriel's religious
opinions and distrusted his financial judgment, the war-like little
rector represented the single romance of his life.

"I had intended stopping at the Old Ladies' Home, but I'll go on with
you instead," responded Gabriel. "I've just had a message from one of
our old servants calling me down to Cross's Corner," he pursued, "so I'm
in a bit of a hurry. That's a bad thing, that murder down there
yesterday, and I'm afraid it will mean trouble for the negroes. Mr.
Blylie, who came to market this morning, told me a crowd had tried to
lynch the fellow last night."

"Well, they've got to hang when they commit hanging crimes," replied
Cyrus stubbornly. "There's no way out of that. It's just, ain't it?"

"Yes, I suppose so," admitted Gabriel, "though, for my part, I've a
feeling against capital punishment--except, of course, in cases of rape,
where, I confess, my blood turns against me."

"An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth--that's the law of God, ain't
it?"

"The old law, yes--but why not quote the law of Christ instead?"

"It wouldn't do--not with the negroes," returned Cyrus, who entertained
for the Founder of Christianity something of the sentimental respect
mingled with an innate distrust of His common-sense with which he
regarded His disciple.

"We can't condemn it until we've tried it," said Gabriel thoughtfully,
and he went on after a moment:

"The terrible thing for us about the negroes is that they are so grave
a responsibility--so grave a responsibility. Of course, we aren't to
blame--we didn't bring them here; and yet I sometimes feel as if we had
really done so."

This was a point of view which Cyrus had never considered, and he felt
an immediate suspicion of it. It looked, somehow, as if it were
insidiously leading the way to an appeal for money.

"It's the best thing that could have happened to them," he replied
shortly. "If they'd remained in Africa, they'd never have been civilized
or--or Christianized."

"Ah, that is just where the responsibility rests on us. We stand for
civilization to them; we stand even--or at least we used to stand--for
Christianity. They haven't learned yet to look above or beyond us, and
the example we set them is one that they are condemned, for sheer lack
of any finer vision, to follow. The majority of them are still hardly
more than uneducated children, and that very fact makes an appeal to
one's compassion which becomes at times almost unbearable."

But this was more than Cyrus could stand even from the rector, whose
conversation he usually tolerated because of the perverse, inexplicable
liking he felt for the man. The charm that Gabriel exercised over him
was almost feminine in its subtlety and in its utter defiance of any
rational sanction. It may have been that his nature, incapable though it
was of love, was not entirely devoid of the rarer capacity for
friendship--or it may have been that, with the inscrutable irony which
appears to control all human attractions, the caged brutality in his
heart was soothed by the unconscious flattery of the other's belief in
him. Now, however, he felt that Gabriel's highfaluting nonsense was
carrying him away. It was well enough to go on like that in the pulpit;
but on week days, when there was business to think of and every minute
might mean the loss of a dollar, there was no use dragging in either
religion or sentiment. Had he put his thoughts plainly, he would
probably have said: "That's not business, Gabriel. The trouble with
you--and with most of you old-fashioned Virginians--is that you don't
understand the first principles of business." These words, indeed, were
almost on his lips, when, catching the rector's innocent glance
wandering round to him, he contented himself with remarking satirically:

"Well, you were always up in the clouds. It doesn't hurt you, I reckon,
though I doubt if it does much toward keeping your pot boiling."

"I must turn off here," said Gabriel gently. "It's the shortest way to
Cross's Corner."

"Do you think any good will come of your going?"

"Probably not--but I couldn't refuse."

Much as he respected Cyrus, he was not sorry to part from him, for their
walk together had left him feeling suddenly old and incompetent to
battle with the problems of life. He knew that Cyrus, even though he
liked him, considered him a bit of a fool, and with a humility which was
unusual in him (for in his heart he was absolutely sure that his own
convictions were right and that Cyrus's were wrong) he began to ask
himself if, by any chance, the other's verdict could be secretly
justified. Was he in reality the failure that Cyrus believed him to be?
Or was it merely that he had drifted into that "depressing view" of
existence against which he so earnestly warned his parishioners? Perhaps
it wasn't Cyrus after all who had produced this effect. Perhaps the
touch of indigestion he had felt after dinner had not entirely
disappeared. Perhaps it meant that he was "getting on"--sixty-five his
last birthday. Perhaps--but already the March wind, fresh and
bud-scented, was blowing away his despondency. Already he was beginning
to feel again that fortifying conviction that whatever was unpleasant
could not possibly be natural.

Ahead of him the straight ashen road flushed to pale red where it
climbed a steep hillside, and when he gained the top, the country lay
before him in all the magic loveliness of early spring. Out of the rosy
earth innumerable points of tender green were visible in the sunlight
and invisible again beneath the faintly rippling shadows that filled the
hollows. From every bough, from every bush, from every creeper which
clung trembling to the rail fences, this wave of green, bursting through
the sombre covering of winter, quivered, as delicate as foam, in the
brilliant sunshine. On either side labourers were working, and where the
ploughs pierced the soil they left narrow channels of darkness.

In the soul of Gabriel, that essence of the spring, which is immortally
young and restless, awakened and gave him back his youth, as it gave the
new grass to the fields and the longing for joy to the hearts of the
ploughmen. He forgot that he was "getting on." He forgot the unnatural
depression which had made him imagine for a moment that the world was a
more difficult place than he had permitted himself to believe--so
difficult a place, indeed, that for some people there could be no
solution of its injustice, its brutality, its dissonance, its
inequalities. The rapture in the song of the bluebirds was sweeter than
the voice of Cyrus to which he had listened. And in a meadow on the
right, an old grey horse, scarred, dim-eyed, spavined, stood resting one
crooked leg, while he gazed wistfully over the topmost rail of the fence
into the vivid green of the distance--for into his aching old bones,
also, there had passed a little of that longing for joy which was born
of the miraculous softness and freshness of the spring. To him, as well
as to Gabriel and to the ploughmen and to the bluebirds flitting, like
bits of fallen sky, along the "snake fences," Nature, the great healer,
had brought her annual gift of the resurrection of hope.

"Cyrus means well," thought Gabriel, with a return of that natural
self-confidence without which no man can exist happily and make a
living. "He means well, but he takes a false view of life." And he added
after a minute: "It's odd how the commercial spirit seems to suck a man
dry when it once gets a hold on him."

He walked on rapidly, leaving the old horse and the ploughmen behind
him, and around his energetic little figure the grey dust, as fine as
powder, spun in swirls and eddies before the driving wind, which had
grown boisterous. As he moved there alone in the deserted road, with his
long black coat flapping against his legs, he appeared so insignificant
and so unheroic that an observer would hardly have suspected that the
greatest belief on the earth--the belief in Life--in its universality
in spite of its littleness, in its justification in spite of its
cruelties--that this belief shone through his shrunken little body as a
flame shines through a vase.

At the end of the next mile, midway between Dinwiddie and Cross's
Corner, stood the small log cabin of the former slave who had sent for
him, and as he approached the narrow path that led, between oyster
shells, from the main road to the single flat brown rock before the
doorstep, he noticed with pleasure how tranquil and happy the little
rustic home appeared under the windy brightness of the March sky.

"People may say what they please, but there never were happier or more
contented creatures than the darkeys," he thought. "I doubt if there's
another peasantry in the world that is half so well off or half so
picturesque."

A large yellow rooster, pecking crumbs from the threshold, began to
scold shrilly, and at the sound, the old servant, a decrepit negress in
a blue gingham dress, hobbled out into the path and stood peering at him
under her hollowed palm. Her forehead was ridged and furrowed beneath
her white turban, and her bleared old eyes looked up at him with a blind
and groping effort at recognition.

"I got your message, Aunt Mehitable. Don't you know me?"

"Is dat you, Marse Gabriel? I made sho' you wan' gwineter let nuttin'
stop you f'om comin'."

"Don't I always come when you send for me?"

"You sutney do, suh. Dat's de gospel trufe--you sutney do."

As he looked at her standing there in the strong sunlight, with her
palsied hand, which was gnarled and roughened until it resembled the
shell of a walnut, curving over her eyes, he felt that a quality at once
alien and enigmatical separated her not only from himself, but from
every other man or woman who was born white instead of black. He had
lived beside her all his life--and yet he could never understand her,
could never reach her, could never even discern the hidden stuff of
which she was made. He could make laws for her, but no child of a white
mother could tell whether those laws ever penetrated that surface
imitation of the superior race and reached the innate differences of
thought, feeling, and memory which constituted her being. Was it
development or mimicry that had brought her up out of savagery and
clothed her in her blue gingham dress and her white turban, as in the
outward covering of civilization?

Her look of crumbling age and the witch-like groping of her glance had
cast a momentary spell over him. When it was gone, he said cheerfully:

"You mustn't be having troubles at your time of life, Aunt Mehitable,"
and in his voice there was the subtle recognition of all that she had
meant to his family in the past, of all that his family had meant to
her. Her claim upon him was the more authentic because it existed only
in his imagination, and in hers. The tie that knit them together was
woven of impalpable strands, but it was unbreakable while he and his
generation were above the earth.

"Dar ain' no end er trouble, Marse Gabriel, ez long ez dar's yo' chillen
en de chillen er yo' chillen ter come atter you. De ole ain' so
techy--dey lets de hornet's nes' hang in peace whar de Lawd put
hit--but de young dey's diff'rent."

"I suppose the neighbourhood is stirred up about the murder. What in
God's name was that boy thinking of?"

The old blood crimes that never ceased where the white and the black
races came together! The old savage folly and the new freedom! The old
ignorance, the old lack of understanding, and the new restlessness, the
new enmity!

"He wan' thinkin' er nuttin', Marse Gabriel. We ole uns kin set down en
steddy, but de young dey up en does wid dere brains ez addled ez de
inside uv er bad aig. 'T wan' dat ar way in de old days w'en we all hed
de say so ez ter w'at wuz en w'at wan't de way ter behave."

Like an institution left from the ruins of the feudal system, which had
crumbled as all ancient and decrepit things must crumble when the wheels
of progress roll over them, she stood there wrapped in the beliefs and
customs of that other century to which she belonged. Her sentiments had
clustered about the past, as his had done, until the border-line between
the romance and the actuality had vanished. She could not help him
because she, also, possessed the retrospective, not the constructive,
vision. He was not conscious of these thoughts, and yet, although he was
unconscious of them, they coloured his reflections while he stood there
in the sunlight, which had begun to fall aslant the blasted pine by the
roadside. The wind had lowered until it came like the breath of spring,
bud-scented, caressing, provocative. Even Gabriel, whose optimism lay in
his blood and bone rather than in his intellect, yielded for a moment
to this call of the spring as one might yield to the delicious
melancholy of a vagrant mood. The long straight road, without bend or
fork, had warmed in the paling sunlight to the colour of old ivory; in a
neighbouring field a young maple tree rose in a flame of buds from the
ridged earth where the ploughing was over; and against the azure sky in
the south a flock of birds drifted up, like blown smoke, from the
marshes.

"Tell me your trouble, then," he said, dropping into the cane-seated
chair she had brought out of the cabin and placed between the flat stone
at the doorstep and the well-brink, on which the yellow rooster stood
spreading his wings. But Aunt Mehitable had returned to the cabin, and
when she reappeared she was holding out to him a cracked saucer on which
there was a piece of preserved watermelon rind and a pewter spoon.

"Dish yer is de ve'y same sort er preserves yo' mouf use'n ter water fur
w'en you wuz a chile," she remarked as she handed the sweet to him.
Whatever her anxiety or affliction could have been, the importance of
his visit had evidently banished it from her mind. She hovered over him
as his mother may have done when he was in his cradle, while the
cheerful self-effacement in which slavery had trained her lent a
pathetic charm to her manner.

"How peaceful it looks," he thought, sitting there, with the saucer in
his hand, and his eyes on the purple shadows that slanted over the
ploughed fields. "You have a good view of the low-grounds, Aunt
Mehitable," he said aloud, and added immediately, "What's that noise in
the road? Do you hear it?"

The old woman shook her head.

"I'se got sorter hard er heahin', Marse Gabriel, but dar's al'ays a
tur'able lot er fuss gwine on w'en de chillen begin ter come up f'om de
fields. 'T wuz becase uv oner dem ar boys dat I sont fur you," she
pursued. "He went plum outer his haid yestiddy en fout wid a w'ite man
down yonder at Cross's Co'nder, en dar's gwine ter be trouble about'n
hit des ez sho' ez you live."

Seated on the flat stone, with her hands hanging over her knees, and her
turbaned head swaying gently back and forth as she talked, she waited as
tranquilly as the rock waited for the inevitable processes of nature.
The patience in her look was the dumb patience of inanimate things; and
her half-bared feet, protruding from the broken soles of her shoes, were
encrusted with the earth of the fields until one could hardly
distinguish them from the ground on which they rested.

"It looks as if there was something like a fight down yonder by the
blasted pine," said the rector, rising from his chair. "I reckon I'd
better go and see what they're quarrelling about."

The negress rose also, and her dim eyes followed him while he went down
the little path between the borders of oyster shells. As he turned into
the open stretch of the road, he glanced back at her, and stopping for a
moment, waved his hand with a gesture that was careless and reassuring.
The fight, or whatever it was that made the noise, was still some
distance ahead in the shadow of the pine-tree, and as he walked towards
it he was thinking casually of other matters--of the wretched condition
of the road after the winter rains, of the need of greater thrift among
the farmers, both white and black, of the touch of indigestion which
still troubled him. There was nothing to warn him that he was
approaching the supreme event in his life, nothing to prepare him for a
change beside which all the changes of the past would appear as
unsubstantial as shadows. His soul might have been the soul in the
grass, so little did its coming or its going affect the forces around
him.

"If this shooting pain keeps up, I'll have to get a prescription from
Doctor Fraser," he thought, and the next minute he cried out suddenly:
"God help us!" and began to run down the road in the direction of the
blasted pine. There was hardly a breath between the instant when he had
thought of his indigestion and the instant when he had called out
sharply on the name of God, yet that flash of time had been long enough
to change the ordinary man into the hero. The spark of greatness in his
nature flamed up and irradiated all that had been merely dull and common
clay a moment before. As he ran on, with his coat tails flapping around
him, and his thin legs wobbling from the unaccustomed speed at which he
moved, he was so unimposing a figure that only the Deity who judges the
motives, not the actions, of men would have been impressed by the
spectacle. Even the three hearty brutes--and it took him but a glance to
see that two of them were drunk, and that the third, being a sober
rascal, was the more dangerous--hardly ceased their merry torment of the
young negro in their midst when he came up with them.

"I know that boy," he said. "He is the grandson of Aunt Mehitable. What
are you doing with him?"

A drunken laugh answered him, while the sober scoundrel--a lank, hairy
ne-er-do-well, with a tendency to epilepsy, whose name he remembered to
have heard--pushed him roughly to the roadside.

"You git out of this here mess, parson. We're goin' to teach this damn
nigger a lesson, and I reckon when he's learned it in hell, he won't
turn his grin on a white woman again in a jiffy."

"Fo' de Lawd, I didn't mean nuttin', Marster!" screamed the boy, livid
with terror. "I didn't know de lady was dar--fo' de Lawd Jesus, I
didn't! My foot jes slipped on de plank w'en I wuz crossin', en I
knocked up agin her."

"He jostled her," observed one of the drunken men judicially, "an' we'll
be roasted befo' we'll let a damn nigger jostle a white lady--even if
she ain't a lady--in these here parts."

In the rector's bone and fibre, drilled there by the ages that had
shaped his character before he began to be, there was all the white
man's horror of an insult to his womankind. But deeper even than this
lay his personal feeling of responsibility for any creature whose
fathers had belonged to him and had toiled in his service.

"I believe the boy is telling the truth," he said, and he added with one
of his characteristic bursts of impulsiveness, "but whether he is or
not, you are too drunk to judge."

There was going to be a battle, he saw, and in the swiftness with which
he discerned this, he made his eternal choice between the preacher and
the fighter. Stripping off his coat, he reached down for a stick from
the roadside; then spinning round on the three of them he struck out
with all his strength, while there floated before him the face of a man
he had killed in his first charge at Manassas. The old fury, the old
triumph, the old blood-stained splendour returned to him. He smelt the
smoke again, he heard the boom of the cannon, the long sobbing rattle of
musketry, and the thought stabbed through him, "God forgive me for
loving a fight!"

Then the fight stopped. There was a patter of feet in the dust as the
young negro fled like a hare up the road in the direction of Dinwiddie.
One of the men leaped the fence and disappeared into the tangled thicket
beyond; while the other two, sobered suddenly, began walking slowly over
the ploughed ground on the right. Ten minutes later Gabriel was lying
alone, with the blood oozing from his mouth, on the trodden weeds by the
roadside. The shadow of the pine had not moved since he watched it; on
the flat rock in front of the cabin the old negress stood, straining her
eyes in the faint sunshine; and up the long road the March wind still
blew, as soft, as provocative, as bud-scented.