IT came. And when it came, it fell out worse for Ramona than Margarita's
most malicious hopes had pictured; but Margarita had no hand in it. It
was the Senora herself.

Since Felipe had so far gained as to be able to be dressed, sit in his
chair on the veranda, and walk about the house and garden a little,
the Senora, at ease in her mind about him, had resumed her old habit of
long, lonely walks on the place. It had been well said by her servants,
that there was not a blade of grass on the estate that the Senora had
not seen. She knew every inch of her land. She had a special purpose
in walking over it now. She was carefully examining to see whether she
could afford to sell to the Ortegas a piece of pasture-land which they
greatly desired to buy, as it joined a pasturage tract of theirs. This
bit of land lay farther from the house than the Senora realized, and it
had taken more time than she thought it would, to go over it; and it was
already sunset on this eventful day, when, hurrying home, she turned
off from the highway into the same shortcut path in which Father
Salvierderra had met Ramona in the spring. There was no difficulty now
in getting through the mustard tangle. It was parched and dry, and had
been trampled by cattle. The Senora walked rapidly, but it was
dusky twilight when she reached the willows; so dusky that she saw
nothing--and she stepped so lightly on the smooth brown path that she
made no sound--until suddenly, face to face with a man and a woman
standing locked in each other's arms, she halted, stepped back a pace,
gave a cry of surprise, and, in the same second, recognized the faces of
the two, who, stricken dumb, stood apart, each gazing into her face with
terror.

Strangely enough, it was Ramona who spoke first. Terror for herself had
stricken her dumb; terror for Alessandro gave her a voice.

"Senora," she began.

"Silence! Shameful creature!" cried the Senora. "Do not dare to speak!
Go to your room!"

Ramona did not move.

"As for you," the Senora continued, turning to Alessandro, "you,"--she
was about to say, "You are discharged from my service from this hour,"
 but recollecting herself in time, said,--"you will answer to Senor
Felipe. Out of my sight!" And the Senora Moreno actually, for once in
her life beside herself with rage, stamped her foot on the ground. "Out
of my sight!" she repeated.

Alessandro did not stir, except to turn towards Ramona with an inquiring
look. He would run no risk of doing what she did not wish. He had no
idea what she would think it best to do in this terrible dilemma.

"Go, Alessandro," said Ramona, calmly, still looking the Senora full in
the eye. Alessandro obeyed; before the words had left her lips, he had
walked away.

Ramona's composure, and Alessandro's waiting for further orders than her
own before stirring from the spot, were too much for Senora Moreno. A
wrath, such as she had not felt since she was young, took possession of
her. As Ramona opened her lips again, saying, "Senora," the Senora did a
shameful deed; she struck the girl on the mouth, a cruel blow.

"Speak not to me!" she cried again; and seizing her by the arm, she
pushed rather than dragged her up the garden-walk.

"Senora, you hurt my arm," said Ramona, still in the same calm voice.
"You need not hold me. I will go with you. I am not afraid."

Was this Ramona? The Senora, already ashamed, let go the arm, and
stared in the girl's face. Even in the twilight she could see upon it
an expression of transcendent peace, and a resolve of which no one would
have thought it capable. "What does this mean?" thought the Senora,
still weak, and trembling all over, from rage. "The hussy, the
hypocrite!" and she seized the arm again.

This time Ramona did not remonstrate, but submitted to being led like
a prisoner, pushed into her own room, the door slammed violently and
locked on the outside.

All of which Margarita saw. She had known for an hour that Ramona
and Alessandro were at the willows, and she had been consumed with
impatience at the Senora's prolonged absence. More than once she had
gone to Felipe, and asked with assumed interest if he were not hungry,
and if he and the Senorita would not have their supper.

"No, no, not till the Senora returns," Felipe had answered. He, too,
happened this time to know where Ramona and Alessandro were. He knew
also where the Senora had gone, and that she would be late home; but he
did not know that there would be any chance of her returning by way of
the willows at the brook; if he had known it, he would have contrived to
summon Ramona.

When Margarita saw Ramona shoved into her room by the pale and trembling
Senora, saw the key turned, taken out, and dropped into the Senora's
pocket, she threw her apron over her head, and ran into the back porch.
Almost a remorse seized her. She remembered in a flash how often Ramona
had helped her in times gone by,--sheltered her from the Senora's
displeasure. She recollected the torn altar-cloth. "Holy Virgin! what
will be done to her now?" she exclaimed, under her breath. Margarita
had never conceived of such an extremity as this. Disgrace, and a sharp
reprimand, and a sundering of all relations with Alessandro,--this was
all Margarita had meant to draw down on Ramona's head. But the Senora
looked as if she might kill her.

"She always did hate her, in her heart," reflected Margarita; "she
shan't starve her to death, anyhow. I'll never stand by and see that.
But it must have been something shameful the Senora saw, to have brought
her to such a pass as this;" and Margarita's jealousy again got the
better of her sympathy. "Good enough for her. No more than she deserved.
An honest fellow like Alessandro, that would make a good husband for any
girl!" Margarita's short-lived remorse was over. She was an enemy again.

It was an odd thing, how identical were Margarita's and the Senora's
view and interpretation of the situation. The Senora looking at it from
above, and Margarita looking at it from below, each was sure, and they
were both equally sure, that it could be nothing more nor less than a
disgraceful intrigue. Mistress and maid were alike incapable either of
conjecturing or of believing the truth.

As ill luck would have it,--or was it good luck?--Felipe also had
witnessed the scene in the garden-walk. Hearing voices, he had looked
out of his window, and, almost doubting the evidence of his senses, had
seen his mother violently dragging Ramona by the arm,--Ramona pale, but
strangely placid; his mother with rage and fury in her white face. The
sight told its own tale to Felipe. Smiting his forehead with his hand,
he groaned out: "Fool that I was, to let her be surprised; she has come
on them unawares; now she will never, never forgive it!" And Felipe
threw himself on his bed, to think what should be done. Presently he
heard his mother's voice, still agitated, calling his name. He remained
silent, sure she would soon seek him in his room. When she entered, and,
seeing him on the bed, came swiftly towards him, saying, "Felipe, dear,
are you ill?" he replied in a feeble voice, "No, mother, only tired a
little to-night;" and as she bent over him, anxious, alarmed, he threw
his arms around her neck and kissed her warmly. "Mother mia!" he said
passionately, "what should I do without you?" The caress, the loving
words, acted like oil on the troubled waters. They restored the Senora
as nothing else could. What mattered anything, so long as she had her
adoring and adorable son! And she would not speak to him, now that he
was so tired, of this disgraceful and vexing matter of Alessandro. It
could wait till morning. She would send him his supper in his room, and
he would not miss Ramona, perhaps.

"I will send your supper here, Felipe," she said; "you must not
overdo; you have been walking too much. Lie still." And kissing him
affectionately, she went to the dining-room, where Margarita, vainly
trying to look as if nothing had happened, was standing, ready to serve
supper. When the Senora entered, with her countenance composed, and in
her ordinary tones said, "Margarita, you can take Senor Felipe's supper
into his room; he is lying down, and will not get up; he is tired,"
 Margarita was ready to doubt if she had not been in a nightmare dream.
Had she, or had she not, within the last half-hour, seen the Senora,
shaking and speechless with rage, push the Senorita Ramona into her
room, and lock her up there? She was so bewildered that she stood still
and gazed at the Senora, with her mouth wide open.

"What are you staring at, girl?" asked the Senora, so sharply that
Margarita jumped.

"Oh, nothing, nothing, Senora! And the Senorita, will she come to
supper? Shall I call her?" she said.

The Senora eyed her. Had she seen? Could she have seen? The Senora
Moreno was herself again. So long as Ramona was under her roof, no
matter what she herself might do or say to the girl, no servant should
treat her with disrespect, or know that aught was wrong.

"The Senorita is not well," she said coldly. "She is in her room. I
myself will take her some supper later, if she wishes it. Do not disturb
her." And the Senora returned to Felipe.

Margarita chuckled inwardly, and proceeded to clear the table she had
spread with such malicious punctuality two short hours before. In those
two short hours how much had happened!

"Small appetite for supper will our Senorita have, I reckon," said the
bitter Margarita, "and the Senor Alessandro also! I'm curious to see how
he will carry himself."

But her curiosity was not gratified. Alessandro came not to the kitchen.
The last of the herdsmen had eaten and gone; it was past nine o'clock,
and no Alessandro. Slyly Margarita ran out and searched in some of the
places where she knew he was in the habit of going; but Alessandro
was not to be found. Once she brushed so near his hiding-place that he
thought he was discovered, and was on the point of speaking, but
luckily held his peace, and she passed on. Alessandro was hid behind the
geranium clump at the chapel door; sitting on the ground, with his knees
drawn up to his chin, watching Ramona's window. He intended to stay
there all night. He felt that he might be needed: if Ramona wanted him,
she would either open her window and call, or would come out and go down
through the garden-walk to the willows. In either case, he would see her
from the hiding-place he had chosen. He was racked by his emotions; mad
with joy one minute, sick at heart with misgiving the next. Ramona loved
him. She had told him so. She had said she would go away with him and
be his wife. The words had but just passed her lips, at that dreadful
moment when the Senora appeared in their presence. As he lived the scene
over again, he re-experienced the joy and the terror equally.

What was not that terrible Senora capable of doing? Why did she look
at him and at Ramona with such loathing scorn? Since she knew that the
Senorita was half Indian, why should she think it so dreadful a thing
for her to marry an Indian man? It did not once enter into Alessandro's
mind, that the Senora could have had any other thought, seeing them as
she did, in each other's arms. And again what had he to give to Ramona?
Could she live in a house such as he must live in,--live as the Temecula
women lived? No! for her sake he must leave his people; must go to some
town, must do--he knew not what--something to earn more money. Anguish
seized him as he pictured to himself Ramona suffering deprivations. The
more he thought of the future in this light, the more his joy faded and
his fear grew. He had never had sufficient hope that she could be his,
to look forward thus to the practical details of life; he had only gone
on loving, and in a vague way dreaming and hoping; and now,--now, in
a moment, all had been changed; in a moment he had spoken, and she had
spoken, and such words once spoken, there was no going back; and he had
put his arms around her, and felt her head on his shoulder, and kissed
her! Yes, he, Alessandro, had kissed the Senorita Ramona, and she had
been glad of it, and had kissed him on the lips, as no maiden kisses a
man unless she will wed with him,--him, Alessandro! Oh, no wonder the
man's brain whirled, as he sat there in the silent darkness, wondering,
afraid, helpless; his love wrenched from him, in the very instant of
their first kiss,--wrenched from him, and he himself ordered, by one who
had the right to order him, to begone! What could an Indian do against a
Moreno!

Would Felipe help him? Ay, there was Felipe! That Felipe was his
friend, Alessandro knew with a knowledge as sure as the wild partridge's
instinct for the shelter of her brood; but could Felipe move the Senora?
Oh, that terrible Senora! What would become of them?

As in the instant of drowning, men are said to review in a second the
whole course of their lives, so in this supreme moment of Alessandro's
love there flashed through his mind vivid pictures of every word and act
of Ramona's since he first knew her. He recollected the tone in which
she had said, and the surprise with which he heard her say it, at the
time of Felipe's fall, "You are Alessandro, are you not?" He heard again
her soft-whispered prayers the first night Felipe slept on the veranda.
He recalled her tender distress because the shearers had had no dinner;
the evident terribleness to her of a person going one whole day without
food. "O God! will she always have food each day if she comes with me?"
 he said. And at the bare thought he was ready to flee away from her
forever. Then he recalled her look and her words only a few hours ago,
when he first told her he loved her; and his heart took courage. She
had said, "I know you love me, Alessandro, and I am glad of it," and had
lifted her eyes to his, with all the love that a woman's eyes can carry;
and when he threw his arms around her, she had of her own accord come
closer, and laid one hand on his shoulder, and turned her face to his.
Ah, what else mattered! There was the whole world; if she loved him like
this, nothing could make them wretched; his love would be enough for
her,--and for him hers was an empire.

It was indeed true, though neither the Senora nor Margarita would have
believed it, that this had been the first word of love ever spoken
between Alessandro and Ramona, the first caress ever given, the first
moment of unreserve. It had come about, as lovers' first words, first
caresses, are so apt to do, unexpectedly, with no more premonition, at
the instant, than there is of the instant of the opening of a flower.
Alessandro had been speaking to Ramona of the conversation Felipe had
held with him in regard to remaining on the place, and asked her if she
knew of the plan.

"Yes," she said; "I heard the Senora talking about it with Felipe, some
days ago."

"Was she against my staying?" asked Alessandro, quickly.

"I think not," said Ramona, "but I am not sure. It is not easy to be
sure what the Senora wishes, till afterward. It was Felipe that proposed
it."

This somewhat enigmatical statement as to the difficulty of knowing the
Senora's wishes was like Greek to Alessandro's mind.

"I do not understand, Senorita," he said. "What do you mean by
'afterward'?"

"I mean," replied Ramona, "that the Senora never says she wishes
anything; she says she leaves everything to Felipe to decide, or to
Father Salvierderra. But I think it is always decided as she wishes to
have it, after all. The Senora is wonderful, Alessandro; don't you think
so?"

"She loves Senor Felipe very much," was Alessandro's evasive reply.

"Oh, yes," exclaimed Ramona. "You do not begin to know how much. She
does not love any other human being. He takes it all. She hasn't any
left. If he had died, she would have died too. That is the reason she
likes you so much; she thinks you saved Felipe's life. I mean, that
is one reason," added Ramona, smiling, and looking up confidingly at
Alessandro, who smiled back, not in vanity, but honest gratitude that
the Senorita was pleased to intimate that he was not unworthy of the
Senora's regard.

"I do not think she likes me," he said. "I cannot tell why; but I do
not think she likes any one in the world. She is not like any one I ever
saw, Senorita."

"No," replied Ramona, thoughtfully. "She is not. I am, oh, so afraid of
her, Alessandro! I have always been, ever since I was a little girl. I
used to think she hated me; but now I think she does not care one way or
the other, if I keep out of her way."

While Ramona spoke these words, her eyes were fixed on the running
water at her feet. If she had looked up, and seen the expression in
Alessandro's eyes as he listened, the thing which was drawing near would
have drawn near faster, would have arrived at that moment; but she did
not look up. She went on, little dreaming how hard she was making it for
Alessandro.

"Many's the time I've come down here, at night, to this brook, and
looked at it, and wished it was a big river, so I could throw myself
in, and be carried away out to the sea, dead. But it is a fearful sin,
Father Salvierderra says, to take one's own life; and always the next
morning, when the sun came out, and the birds sang, I've been glad
enough I had not done it. Were you ever so unhappy as that, Alessandro?"

"No, Senorita, never," replied Alessandro; "and it is thought a great
disgrace, among us, to kill one's self. I think I could never do it.
But, oh, Senorita, it is a grief to think of your being unhappy. Will
you always be so? Must you always stay here?"

"Oh, but I am not always unhappy!" said Ramona, with her sunny little
laugh. "Indeed, I am generally very happy. Father Salvierderra says that
if one does no sin, one will be always happy, and that it is a sin not
to rejoice every hour of the day in the sun and the sky and the work
there is to do; and there is always plenty of that." Then, her face
clouding, she continued: "I suppose I shall always stay here. I have no
other home; you know I was the Senora's sister's adopted child. She died
when I was little, and the Senora kindly took me. Father Salvierderra
says I must never forget to be grateful to her for all she has done for
me, and I try not to."

Alessandro eyed her closely. The whole story, as Juan Can had told it to
him, of the girl's birth, was burning in his thoughts. How he longed to
cry out, "O my loved one, they have made you homeless in your home. They
despise you. The blood of my race is in your veins; come to me; come to
me! be surrounded with love!" But he dared not. How could he dare?

Some strange spell seemed to have unloosed Ramona's tongue to-night.
She had never before spoken to Alessandro of her own personal history or
burdens; but she went on: "The worst thing is, Alessandro, that she will
not tell me who my mother was; and I do not know if she is alive or not,
or anything about her. Once I asked the Senora, but she forbade me ever
to ask her again. She said she herself would tell me when it was proper
for me to know. But she never has."

How the secret trembled on Alessandro's lips now. Ramona had never
seemed so near, so intimate, so trusting. What would happen if he were
to tell her the truth? Would the sudden knowledge draw her closer to
him, or repel her?

"Have you never asked her again?" he said.

Ramona looked up astonished. "No one ever disobeyed the Senora," she
said quickly.

"I would!" exclaimed Alessandro.

"You may think so," said Ramona, "but you couldn't. When you tried, you
would find you couldn't. I did ask Father Salvierderra once."

"What did he say?" asked Alessandro, breathless.

"The same thing. He said I must not ask; I was not old enough. When the
time came, I would be told," answered Ramona, sadly. "I don't see what
they can mean by the time's coming. What do you suppose they meant?"

"I do not know the ways of any people but my own, Senorita," replied
Alessandro. "Many things that your people do, and still more that these
Americans do, are to me so strange, I know nothing what they mean.
Perhaps they do not know who was your mother?"

"I am sure they do," answered Ramona, in a low tone, as if the words
were wrung from her. "But let us talk about something else, Alessandro;
not about sad things, about pleasant things. Let us talk about your
staying here."

"Would it be truly a pleasure to the Senorita Ramona, if I stayed?" said
Alessandro.

"You know it would," answered Ramona, frankly, yet with a tremor in her
voice, which Alessandro felt. "I do not see what we could any of us do
without you. Felipe says he shall not let you go."

Alessandro's face glowed. "It must be as my father says, Senorita," he
said. "A messenger came from him yesterday, and I sent him back with a
letter telling him what the Senor Felipe had proposed to me, and asking
him what I should do. My father is very old, Senorita, and I do not see
how he can well spare me. I am his only child, and my mother died years
ago. We live alone together in our house, and when I am away he is very
lonely. But he would like to have me earn the wages, I know, and I hope
he will think it best for me to stay. There are many things we want to
do for the village; most of our people are poor, and can do little more
than get what they need to eat day by day, and my father wishes to see
them better off before he dies. Now that the Americans are coming in all
around us, he is afraid and anxious all the time. He wants to get a big
fence built around our land, so as to show where it is; but the people
cannot take much time to work on the fence; they need all their time to
work for themselves and their families. Indians have a hard time to live
now, Senorita. Were you ever in Temecula?"

"No," said Ramona. "Is it a large town?"

Alessandro sighed. "Dear Senorita, it is not a town; it is only a little
village not more than twenty houses in all, and some of those are built
only of tule. There is a chapel, and a graveyard. We built an adobe wall
around the graveyard last year. That my father said we would do, before
we built the fence round the village."

"How many people are there in the village?" asked Ramona.

"Nearly two hundred, when they are all there; but many of them are away
most of the time. They must go where they can get work; they are
hired by the farmers, or to do work on the great ditches, or to go as
shepherds; and some of them take their wives and children with them. I
do not believe the Senorita has ever seen any very poor people."

"Oh, yes, I have, Alessandro, at Santa Barbara. There were many poor
people there, and the Sisters used to give them food every week."

"Indians?" said Alessandro.

Ramona colored. "Yes," she said, "some of them were, but not like your
men, Alessandro. They were very different; miserable looking; they could
not read nor write, and they seemed to have no ambition."

"That is the trouble," said Alessandro, "with so many of them; it is
with my father's people, too. They say, 'What is the use?' My father
gets in despair with them, because they will not learn better. He gives
them a great deal, but they do not seem to be any better off for it.
There is only one other man in our village who can read and write,
besides my father and me, Senorita; and yet my father is all the time
begging them to come to his house and learn of him. But they say they
have no time; and indeed there is much truth in that, Senorita. You see
everybody has troubles, Senorita."

Ramona had been listening with sorrowful face. All this was new to her.
Until to-night, neither she nor Alessandro had spoken of private and
personal matters.

"Ah, but these are real troubles," she said. "I do not think mine were
real troubles at all. I wish I could do something for your people,
Alessandro. If the village were only near by, I could teach them, could
I not? I could teach them to read. The Sisters always said, that to
teach the ignorant and the poor was the noblest work one could do. I
wish I could teach your people. Have you any relatives there
besides your father? Is there any one in the village that you--love,
Alessandro?"

Alessandro was too much absorbed in thoughts of his people, to observe
the hesitating emphasis with which Ramona asked this question.

"Yes, Senorita, I love them all. They are like my brothers and sisters,
all of my father's people," he said; "and I am unhappy about them all
the time."

During the whole of this conversation Ramona had had an undercurrent of
thought going on, which was making her uneasy. The more Alessandro said
about his father and his people, the more she realized that he was held
to Temecula by bonds that would be hard to break, the more she feared
his father would not let him remain away from home for any length of
time. At the thought of his going away, her very heart sickened. Taking
a sudden step towards him, she said abruptly, "Alessandro, I am afraid
your father will not give his consent to your staying here."

"So am I, Senorita," he replied sadly.

"And you would not stay if he did not approve of it, of course," she
said.

"How could I, Senorita?"

"No," she said, "it would not be right;" but as she said these words,
the tears filled her eyes.

Alessandro saw them. The world changed in that second. "Senorita!
Senorita Ramona!" he cried, "tears have come in your eyes! O Senorita,
then you will not be angry if I say that I love you!" and Alessandro
trembled with the terror and delight of having said the words.

Hardly did he trust his palpitating senses to be telling him true the
words that followed, quick, firm, though only in a whisper,--"I know
that you love me, Alessandro, and I am glad of it!" Yes, this was
what the Senorita Ramona was saying! And when he stammered, "But you,
Senorita, you do not--you could not--" "Yes, Alessandro, I do--I love
you!" in the same clear, firm whisper; and the next minute Alessandro's
arms were around Ramona, and he had kissed her, sobbing rather than
saying, "O Senorita, do you mean that you will go with me? that you
are mine? Oh, no, beloved Senorita, you cannot mean that!" But he was
kissing her. He knew she did mean it; and Ramona, whispering, "Yes,
Alessandro, I do mean it; I will go with you," clung to him with her
hands, and kissed him, and repeated it, "I will go with you, I love
you." And then, just then, came the Senora's step, and her sharp cry
of amazement, and there she stood, no more than an arm's-length away,
looking at them with her indignant, terrible eyes.

What an hour this for Alessandro to be living over and over, as he
crouched in the darkness, watching! But the bewilderment of his emotions
did not dull his senses. As if stalking deer in a forest, he listened
for sounds from the house. It seemed strangely still. As the darkness
deepened, it seemed still stranger that no lamps were lit. Darkness in
the Senora's room, in the Senorita's; a faint light in the dining-room,
soon put out,--evidently no supper going on there. Only from under
Felipe's door streamed a faint radiance; and creeping close to the
veranda, Alessandro heard voices fitfully talking,--the Senora's and
Felipe's; no word from Ramona. Piteously he fixed his eyes on her
window; it was open, but the curtains tight drawn; no stir, no sound.
Where was she? What had been done to his love? Only the tireless caution
and infinite patience of his Indian blood kept Alessandro from going
to her window. But he would imperil nothing by acting on his own
responsibility. He would wait, if it were till daylight, till his
love made a sign. Certainly before long Senor Felipe would come to his
veranda bed, and then he could venture to speak to him. But it was near
midnight when the door of Felipe's room opened, and he and his mother
came out, still speaking in low tones. Felipe lay down on his couch; his
mother, bending over, kissed him, bade him good-night, and went into her
own room.

It had been some time now since Alessandro had left off sleeping on the
veranda floor by Felipe's side. Felipe was so well it was not needful.
But Felipe felt sure he would come to-night, and was not surprised
when, a few minutes after the Senora's door closed, he heard a low voice
through the vines, "Senor Felipe?"

"Hush, Alessandro," whispered Felipe. "Do not make a sound. To-morrow
morning early I will see you, behind the little sheepfold. It is not
safe to talk here."

"Where is the Senorita?" Alessandro breathed rather than said.

"In her room," answered Felipe.

"Well?" said Alessandro.

"Yes," said Felipe, hoping he was not lying; and this was all Alessandro
had to comfort himself with, through his long night of watching. No, not
all; one other thing comforted him,--the notes of two wood-doves, that
at intervals he heard, cooing to each other; just the two notes, the
call and the answer, "Love?" "Here." "Love?" "Here,"--and long intervals
of silence between. Plain as if written on a page was the thing they
told.

"That is what my Ramona is like," thought he, "the gentle wood-dove. If
she is my wife my people will call her Majel, the Wood-Dove."