They had taken the direct county road across the hills from Monterey,
instead of the Seventeen Mile Drive around by the coast, so that Carmel
Bay came upon them without any fore-glimmerings of its beauty. Dropping
down through the pungent pines, they passed woods-embowered cottages,
quaint and rustic, of artists and writers, and went on across wind-blown
rolling sandhills held to place by sturdy lupine and nodding with pale
California poppies. Saxon screamed in sudden wonder of delight, then
caught her breath and gazed at the amazing peacock-blue of a breaker,
shot through with golden sunlight, overfalling in a mile-long sweep and
thundering into white ruin of foam on a crescent beach of sand scarcely
less white.

How long they stood and watched the stately procession of breakers,
rising from out the deep and wind-capped sea to froth and thunder at
their feet, Saxon did not know. She was recalled to herself when Billy,
laughing, tried to remove the telescope basket from her shoulders.

"You kind of look as though you was goin' to stop a while," he said. "So
we might as well get comfortable."

"I never dreamed it, I never dreamed it," she repeated, with
passionately clasped hands. "I... I thought the surf at the Cliff House
was wonderful, but it gave no idea of this.--Oh! Look! LOOK! Did you
ever see such an unspeakable color? And the sunlight flashing right
through it! Oh! Oh! Oh!"

At last she was able to take her eyes from the surf and gaze at the
sea-horizon of deepest peacock-blue and piled with cloud-masses, at the
curve of the beach south to the jagged point of rocks, and at the rugged
blue mountains seen across soft low hills, landward, up Carmel Valley.

"Might as well sit down an' take it easy," Billy indulged her. "This is
too good to want to run away from all at once."

Saxon assented, but began immediately to unlace her shoes.

"You ain't a-goin' to?" Billy asked in surprised delight, then began
unlacing his own.

But before they were ready to run barefooted on the perilous fringe
of cream-wet sand where land and ocean met, a new and wonderful thing
attracted their attention. Down from the dark pines and across the
sandhills ran a man, naked save for narrow trunks. He was smooth and
rosy-skinned, cherubic-faced, with a thatch of curly yellow hair, but
his body was hugely thewed as a Hercules'.

"Gee!--must be Sandow," Billy muttered low to Saxon.

But she was thinking of the engraving in her mother's scrapbook and of
the Vikings on the wet sands of England.

The runner passed them a dozen feet away, crossed the wet sand, never
pausing, till the froth wash was to his knees while above him, ten feet
at least, upreared a wall of overtopping water. Huge and powerful as
his body had seemed, it was now white and fragile in the face of that
imminent, great-handed buffet of the sea. Saxon gasped with anxiety, and
she stole a look at Billy to note that he was tense with watching.

But the stranger sprang to meet the blow, and, just when it seemed he
must be crushed, he dived into the face of the breaker and disappeared.
The mighty mass of water fell in thunder on the beach, but beyond
appeared a yellow head, one arm out-reaching, and a portion of a
shoulder. Only a few strokes was he able to make ere he was compelled
to dive through another breaker. This was the battle--to win seaward
against the sweep of the shoreward hastening sea. Each time he dived
and was lost to view Saxon caught her breath and clenched her hands.
Sometimes, after the passage of a breaker, they could not find him, and
when they did he would be scores of feet away, flung there like a chip
by a smoke-bearded breaker. Often it seemed he must fail and be thrown
upon the beach, but at the end of half an hour he was beyond the outer
edge of the surf and swimming strong, no longer diving, but topping the
waves. Soon he was so far away that only at intervals could they find
the speck of him. That, too, vanished, and Saxon and Billy looked at
each other, she with amazement at the swimmer's valor, Billy with blue
eyes flashing.

"Some swimmer, that boy, some swimmer," he praised. "Nothing
chicken-hearted about him.--Say, I only know tank-swimmin', an'
bay-swimmin', but now I'm goin' to learn ocean-swimmin'. If I could do
that I'd be so proud you couldn't come within forty feet of me. Why,
Saxon, honest to God, I'd sooner do what he done than own a thousan'
farms. Oh, I can swim, too, I'm tellin' you, like a fish--I swum,
one Sunday, from the Narrow Gauge Pier to Sessions' Basin, an' that's
miles--but I never seen anything like that guy in the swimmin' line.
An' I'm not goin' to leave this beach until he comes back.--All by his
lonely out there in a mountain sea, think of it! He's got his nerve all
right, all right."

Saxon and Billy ran barefooted up and down the beach, pursuing each
other with brandished snakes of seaweed and playing like children for
an hour. It was not until they were putting on their shoes that they
sighted the yellow head bearing shoreward. Billy was at the edge of the
surf to meet him, emerging, not white-skinned as he had entered, but red
from the pounding he had received at the hands of the sea.

"You're a wonder, and I just got to hand it to you," Billy greeted him
in outspoken admiration.

"It was a big surf to-day," the young man replied, with a nod of
acknowledgment.

"It don't happen that you are a fighter I never heard of?" Billy
queried, striving to get some inkling of the identity of the physical
prodigy.

The other laughed and shook his head, and Billy could not guess that he
was an ex-captain of a 'Varsity Eleven, and incidentally the father of
a family and the author of many books. He looked Billy over with an eye
trained in measuring freshmen aspirants for the gridiron.

"You're some body of a man," he appreciated. "You'd strip with the best
of them. Am I right in guessing that you know your way about in the
ring?"

Billy nodded. "My name's Roberts."

The swimmer scowled with a futile effort at recollection.

"Bill--Bill Roberts," Billy supplemented.

"Oh, ho!--Not BIG Bill Roberts? Why, I saw you fight, before the
earthquake, in the Mechanic's Pavilion. It was a preliminary to Eddie
Hanlon and some other fellow. You're a two-handed fighter, I remember
that, with an awful wallop, but slow. Yes, I remember, you were slow
that night, but you got your man." He put out a wet hand. "My name's
Hazard--Jim Hazard."

"An' if you're the football coach that was, a couple of years ago, I've
read about you in the papers. Am I right?"

They shook hands heartily, and Saxon was introduced. She felt very small
beside the two young giants, and very proud, withal, that she belonged
to the race that gave them birth. She could only listen to them talk.

"I'd like to put on the gloves with you every day for half an hour,"
 Hazard said. "You could teach me a lot. Are you going to stay around
here?"

"No. We're goin' on down the coast, lookin' for land. Just the same, I
could teach you a few, and there's one thing you could teach me--surf
swimmin'."

"I'll swap lessons with you any time," Hazard offered. He turned to
Saxon. "Why don't you stop in Carmel for a while? It isn't so bad."

"It's beautiful," she acknowledged, with a grateful smile, "but--" She
turned and pointed to their packs on the edge of the lupine. "We're on
the tramp, and lookin' for government land."

"If you're looking down past the Sur for it, it will keep," he laughed.
"Well, I've got to run along and get some clothes on. If you come back
this way, look me up. Anybody will tell you where I live. So long."

And, as he had first arrived, he departed, crossing the sandhills on the
run.

Billy followed him with admiring eyes.

"Some boy, some boy," he murmured. "Why, Saxon, he's famous. If I've
seen his face in the papers once, I've seen it a thousand times. An' he
ain't a bit stuck on himself. Just man to man. Say!--I'm beginnin' to
have faith in the old stock again."

They turned their backs on the beach and in the tiny main street bought
meat, vegetables, and half a dozen eggs. Billy had to drag Saxon away
from the window of a fascinating shop where were iridescent pearls of
abalone, set and unset.

"Abalones grow here, all along the coast," Billy assured her; "an' I'll
get you all you want. Low tide's the time."

"My father had a set of cuff-buttons made of abalone shell," she said.
"They were set in pure, soft gold. I haven't thought about them for
years, and I wonder who has them now."

They turned south. Everywhere from among the pines peeped the quaint
pretty houses of the artist folk, and they were not prepared, where the
road dipped to Carmel River, for the building that met their eyes.

"I know what it is," Saxon almost whispered. "It's an old Spanish
Mission. It's the Carmel Mission, of course. That's the way the
Spaniards came up from Mexico, building missions as they came and
converting the Indians."

"Until we chased them out, Spaniards an' Indians, whole kit an'
caboodle," Billy observed with calm satisfaction.

"Just the same, it's wonderful," Saxon mused, gazing at the big,
half-ruined adobe structure. "There is the Mission Dolores, in San
Francisco, but it's smaller than this and not as old."

Hidden from the sea by low hillocks, forsaken by human being and human
habitation, the church of sun-baked clay and straw and chalk-rock stood
hushed and breathless in the midst of the adobe ruins which once had
housed its worshiping thousands. The spirit of the place descended upon
Saxon and Billy, and they walked softly, speaking in whispers, almost
afraid to go in through the open ports. There was neither priest nor
worshiper, yet they found all the evidences of use, by a congregation
which Billy judged must be small from the number of the benches. Later
they climbed the earthquake-racked belfry, noting the hand-hewn timbers;
and in the gallery, discovering the pure quality of their voices, Saxon,
trembling at her own temerity, softly sang the opening bars of "Jesus
Lover of My Soul." Delighted with the result, she leaned over the
railing, gradually increasing her voice to its full strength as she
sang:

"Jesus, Lover of my soul, Let me to Thy bosom fly, While the nearer
waters roll, While the tempest still is nigh. Hide me, O my Saviour,
hide, Till the storm of life is past; Safe into the haven guide And
receive my soul at last."

Billy leaned against the ancient wall and loved her with his eyes, and,
when she had finished, he murmured, almost in a whisper:

"That was beautiful--just beautiful. An' you ought to a-seen your face
when you sang. It was as beautiful as your voice. Ain't it funny?--I
never think of religion except when I think of you."

They camped in the willow bottom, cooked dinner, and spent the afternoon
on the point of low rocks north of the mouth of the river. They had not
intended to spend the afternoon, but found themselves too fascinated to
turn away from the breakers bursting upon the rocks and from the many
kinds of colorful sea life -- starfish, crabs, mussels, sea anemones, and,
once, in a rock-pool, a small devilfish that chilled their blood when
it cast the hooded net of its body around the small crabs they tossed
to it. As the tide grew lower, they gathered a mess of mussels--huge
fellows, five and six inches long and bearded like patriarchs. Then,
while Billy wandered in a vain search for abalones, Saxon lay and
dabbled in the crystal-clear water of a rock-pool, dipping up handfuls
of glistening jewels--ground bits of shell and pebble of flashing rose
and blue and green and violet. Billy came back and lay beside her,
lazying in the sea-cool sunshine, and together they watched the sun sink
into the horizon where the ocean was deepest peacock-blue.

She reached out her hand to Billy's and sighed with sheer repletion of
content. It seemed she had never lived such a wonderful day. It was as
if all old dreams were coming true. Such beauty of the world she had
never guessed in her fondest imagining. Billy pressed her hand tenderly.

"What was you thinkin' of?" he asked, as they arose finally to go.

"Oh, I don't know, Billy. Perhaps that it was better, one day like this,
than ten thousand years in Oakland."